# 10_ORTHOPEDIC
# Source: 10 ORTHOPEDIC.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 10.0 Orthopedic Surgery
# Pages: 928-1085
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Darrach Procedure (p. 928)
- Dorsal Stabilization And Extensor Synovectomy Of The Rheumatoid Wrist (p. 929)
- Metacarpophalangeal And Interphalangeal Joint Arthroplasty And Arthrodesis (p. 931)
- Arthrodesis Of The Wrist (p. 932)
- Total Wrist Replacement (p. 934)
- Excision Of Ganglion Of The Wrist (p. 939)
- Repair Of Lacerated Tendons/Nerves (p. 941)
- Wrist Arthroscopy/Repair Of Triangular Fibrocartilage Complex Tears (p. 946)
- Carpal Tunnel Release (p. 947)
- Fixation Of Fractures And Dislocations Of The Wrist And Hand (p. 950)
- Digit And Hand Replantation (p. 953)
- Arthroscopic Shoulder Surgery (p. 958)
- Arthritis (p. 960)
- Surgery For Shoulder Instability (p. 964)
- Glenohumeral Shoulder Arthroplasty (p. 969)
- Shoulder Girdle Procedures (p. 973)
- Brachial Plexus Surgery (p. 974)
- Minimally Invasive Posterior Lumbar Discectomy (Microdiscectomy) (p. 984)
- Spinal Reconstruction And Fusion—Thoracic And Thoracolumbar Spine (p. 988)
- Spinal Reconstruction And Fusion— Lumbosacral Spine (p. 992)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of Pelvis Or Acetabulum (p. 1004)
- Closed Reduction And External Fixation Of The Pelvis (p. 1006)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of Acetabulum Fractures (p. 1008)
- Osteotomy And Bone Graft Augmentation Of The Pelvis (p. 1011)
- Arthrodesis Of The Sacroiliac Joint (p. 1012)
- Disarticulation Of The Hip And Hindquarter Amputation (p. 1014)
- Arthroplasty Of The Hip (p. 1018)
- Arthrodesis Of The Hip (p. 1021)
- Synovectomy Of The Hip (p. 1022)
- Intertrochanteric, Subtrochanteric Fractures) (p. 1026)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of Distal Femur Fractures (p. 1029)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of The Femoral Shaft With Plate (p. 1030)
- Intramedullary Nailing Of Femoral Shaft (p. 1031)
- Repair Of Nonunion/Malunion Of Proximal Third Of Femur, Proximal Femoral Osteotomy For Osteoarthritis (p. 1033)
- Closed Reduction And External Fixation Of Femur (p. 1034)
- Arthroplasty Of The Knee (p. 1038)
- Arthrodesis Of The Knee (p. 1039)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of Patellar Fractures (p. 1041)
- Repair Or Reconstruction Of Knee Ligaments (p. 1042)
- Patellar Realignment (p. 1044)
- Arthroscopy Of The Knee (p. 1046)
- Knee Arthrotomy (p. 1047)
- Repair Of Tendons—Knee And Leg (p. 1048)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of The Tibial Plateau Fracture (p. 1056)
- Intramedullary Nailing, Tibia (p. 1057)
- External Fixation, Tibia (p. 1058)
- Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif) Of Distal Tibia, Ankle, And Foot Fractures (p. 1059)
- Repair Nonunion/Malunion, Tibia (p. 1060)
- Arthroscopy Of The Ankle (p. 1061)
- Ankle Arthrotomy (p. 1063)
- Ankle Arthrodesis (p. 1064)
- Repair/Reconstruction Of Ankle Ligaments (p. 1065)
- Amputation Through Ankle (Syme) (p. 1066)
- Amputation, Transmetatarsal (p. 1068)
- And Foot (p. 1069)
- Amputation Above The Knee (p. 1070)
- Amputation Below The Knee (p. 1072)
- Fasciotomy Of The Thigh (p. 1075)
- Fasciotomy Of The Leg (p. 1077)
- Biopsy, Leg And Foot (p. 1080)
- Biopsy Or Drainage Of Abscess/Excision Of Tumor (p. 1081)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

           10.0 ORTHOPEDIC
                                      SURGERY

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.1 Hand Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Vincent R. Hentz, MD
                                           Kimberley Wirsing, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Lindsey Vokach-Brodsky, MB, ChB, FFARCSI

===== PAGE 928 =====
DARRACH PROCEDURE
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The Darrach procedure (Fig. 10.1-1) is a resection of the distal ulna. The distal 2 cm of the ulna is
                                   resected subperiosteally, and local soft tissues are used to stabilize and cover the remaining ulna. It is commonly
                                   performed in patients who have had a disruption of the distal radioulnar joint with subluxation of the ulna. It also is
                                   indicated for patients who have had a malunion of a distal radius fracture such that the radius has shortened relative
                                   to the ulna or is abnormally angulated, resulting in dorsal subluxation of the ulna and impingement of the ulnar head
                                   upon the carpus. This causes painful motion of the wrist and forearm and posttraumatic degenerative arthritis of the
                                   ulnar head, carpus, and sigmoid notch of the distal radius. Disorders of the distal radioulnar joint and degeneration
                                   of the ulnar head, which may lead to attrition rupture of the overlying extensor tendons, are common in rheumatoid
                                   arthritis. This dorsal prominence of the ulnar head is treated by Darrach resection, combined with a soft-tissue
                                   procedure to stabilize the remaining ulna. Osteoarthritic degeneration of the distal radioulnar joint, either 2° trauma
                                   (see above) or due to idiopathic osteoarthritis, responds well to this procedure.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: The Soavé-Kapandji procedure retains the articular portion of the distal
                                   ulna and fuses it to the sigmoid notch. The area of distal ulna that is resected is proximal to the joint; instability
                                   of the proximal stump may become problematic. Hemiresection with tendon interposition as well as distal ulnar
                                   arthroplasty are less common techniques for managing distal radioulnar arthritis.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis or derangement of the distal radioulnar joint; rheumatoid arthritis; ulnar im-
                                   pingement syndrome; malunion of Colles’ fracture or other fracture of the distal radius

                                                                                             Dorsal branch
                                                                                             ulnar nerve

                                                                                             Incision
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                  Cartilage
                                                                Sigmoid                           disk         ECU and
                                                                notch                                          sheath
                                                                of radius                                      Sigmoid notch
                                                                Radius                                         Final resection
                                                                Ulna
                                                                                                               Ulna
                                                                         A
                                                                                                               Radius
                                                                                             B

                                               Figure 10.1-1. The Darrach procedure. A: Skin incision. Avoid dorsal cutaneous
                                               branch of the ulnar nerve. B: The distal ulna is resected at the radioulnar articulation
                                               just proximal to the sigmoid notch. (ECU = extensor carpi ulnaris) (Reproduced
                                               with permission from Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition.
                                               Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                Dorsal-ulnar, over distal ulna

                                    Special                 Pneumatic tourniquet
                                      instrumentation

                             928

===== PAGE 929 =====
Dorsal Stabilization and Extensor Synovectomy of the Rheumatoid Wrist            929

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time           1–2.5 h, depending on associated procedures

                     Tourniquet              150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                     Closing                 Routine skin closure; postop splint placed at conclusion of procedure.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal; performed under tourniquet control

                     Postop care             PACU → home

                     Mortality               None associated with procedure

                     Morbidity               Ulnar nerve injury: Rare
                                             Postop swelling (rarely requires specific treatment)

                     Pain score              5–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Adult population

                     Male:Female             Slight predominance of females, due to incidence of malunion of Colles’ fractures in women with
                                             senile osteoporosis as well as incidence of inflammatory arthropathies in women

                     Incidence               Not uncommon

                     Etiology                See Usual preop diagnosis, above.

                     Associated              Rheumatoid arthritis
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                        Orthopedic Surgery
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Grawe B, Heincelman C, Stern P: Functional results of the Darrach procedure: a long-term outcome study. J Hand Surg Am
                        2012; 37(12):2475–80.
                     2. Nolan WB, Eaton RG: A Darrach procedure for distal ulnar pathology derangements. Clin Orthop 1992; 275:85–9.

                   DORSAL STABILIZATION AND EXTENSOR SYNOVECTOMY
                   OF THE RHEUMATOID WRIST
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: This procedure is indicated for patients with rheumatoid arthritis and extensor tenosynovitis refractory to
                   medical treatment, as well as extensor tendon ruptures and/or intercarpal synovitis. The procedure is performed under
                   tourniquet control through a straight dorsal incision over the wrist. A radical tenosynovectomy of the extensor tendons
                   in all six extensor compartments is carried out. Tendon ruptures or impending ruptures are repaired with tendon grafts
                   or side-to-side anastomoses. Bone spurs are removed, and a synovectomy of the distal radioulnar joint is carried out. A
                   modified Darrach procedure, with resection or osteoplasty of the distal ulna, is usually performed. If there is evidence
                   of synovitis within the wrist joint, a synovectomy is performed through a dorsal arthrotomy. A flap of the extensor reti-
                   naculum is transposed beneath the extensor tendons to reinforce the dorsal wrist ligaments and, thus, stabilize the wrist

===== PAGE 930 =====
930   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                   to prevent volar subluxation of the carpus. A posterior interosseous neurectomy is carried out at the same time. The re-
                                   maining extensor retinaculum is divided into two transverse strips, and one is used to stabilize the distal ulna. The second
                                   strip is placed dorsal to the extensor tendons so they will not bowstring during wrist extension.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Rheumatoid arthritis with extensor tendon tenosynovitis; extensor tendon rupture; distal
                                   radioulnar joint synovitis and/or subluxation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                 Dorsal wrist (Fig. 10.1-2)

                                    Special                  Pneumatic tourniquet
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                    Surgical time            2h

                                    Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    Closing                  Postop splint
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      Minimal; tourniquet used until dressing in place

                                    Postop care              PACU → home

                                    Mortality                None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity                Extremity swelling (typically does not require treatment)
                                                             Delayed healing 2° immunosuppression and steroid use
                                                             Wound infection: Rare (unless patient is immunosuppressed)

                                    Pain score               3–5
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                               Figure 10.1-2. Incision and exposure for dorsal tenosynovectomy. Note superficial
                                               branches of radial and ulnar nerves protected in skin flaps. (Illustration by Elizabeth
                                               Roselius, 1988. Reproduced with permission from Green DP, Hotchkiss RN and
                                               Pederson WC, eds: Operative Hand Surgery, 2nd edition. Churchill Livingstone: 1988.)

===== PAGE 931 =====
Metacarpophalangeal and Interphalangeal Joint Arthroplasty and Arthrodesis                 931

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Procedure uncommon before 4th decade

                     Male:Female             As in all patients with rheumatoid arthritis, females more common.

                     Incidence               Not uncommon

                     Etiology                Connective tissue disorder; rheumatoid arthritis or variant

                     Associated              All conditions associated with connective tissue disorders, including active rheumatoid arthritis,
                       conditions            steroid dependency, immunosuppressive therapy, and/or skin fragility

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Papp SR, Athwal GS, Pichora DR: The rheumatoid wrist. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2006; 14(2):65–77.
                     2. Purdy BA, Wilson, RL: Synovectomy/tenosynovectomy tendon rupture and repair. In: Cooney RP, ed. The Wrist, 2nd edition.
                        Wolters Kluwer, Philadelphia: 2010.

                   METACARPOPHALANGEAL AND INTERPHALANGEAL
                   JOINT ARTHROPLASTY and ARTHRODESIS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Joint replacement (arthroplasty) in the hand is most commonly indicated in patients with rheuma-

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                   toid arthritis with severe joint destruction → pain and dysfunction. Another option in these patients is arthrodesis
                   or joint fusion, which involves removing the degenerative cartilaginous surfaces and using implanted metal to
                   secure two opposing bone surfaces. Joint arthroplasty is rarely indicated in patients with osteoarthritis. The most
                   common prostheses, made of silicone rubber and popularized by Swanson, differ from total joint replacement in
                   the hip or knee in that they do not function as true joints, but rather as spacers in a resection arthroplasty. Most of
                   the stability and motion of these joints depend on meticulous soft-tissue reconstructions involving tendon and liga-
                   ment transfers, as well as intensive postop physical therapy. To obtain good results, patients must be well motivated
                   and understand their disease process and what will be asked of them during the recovery period. The results for
                   metacarpophalangeal (MP) arthroplasty are far better than those obtained in the proximal interphalangeal joints.
                   Proximal interphalangeal joint arthroplasty is sometimes complicated by soft-tissue deformities in rheumatoid
                   arthritis such as swan-neck and boutonniere deformities. A swan-neck deformity consists of hyperextension of
                   the PIP joint and flexion of the DIP joint. Conversely, a boutonniere deformity involves flexion at the PIP joint and
                   hyperextension of the DIP joint. It is generally not indicated for the index finger due to the high stresses associ-
                   ated with pinch that may compromise the longevity or stability of an arthroplasty. Distal interphalangeal (DIP)
                   arthroplasty is rarely performed because these patients do well with fusions. The procedure for the MP joints is
                   performed through a dorsal transverse incision under tourniquet control. The metacarpal heads are removed with
                   an oscillating saw and the intramedullary canals reamed to accept the stems of the prostheses. After they have
                   been placed with a no-touch technique, the capsule is closed, and the supporting ligaments are reconstructed with
                   centralization of extensor tendons. Technique for PIP joints is similar, although some surgeons will use a volar ap-
                   proach. A splint with support for each finger is placed at the conclusion of surgery. Reconstructive procedures of
                   the wrist and fingers can be combined with arthroplasty.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Some surgeons favor longitudinal incisions rather than a transverse incision
                   for the approach to the MP joints. A volar approach to the PIP joint may be used.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Rheumatoid arthritis or other connective-tissue disorder

===== PAGE 932 =====
932   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                 Dorsal hand, transverse, or longitudinal

                                    Special                  MP or PIP joint prostheses and associated instruments for preparing the medullary canal; power
                                      instrumentation        for bone cuts; K-wires, plates, or wire loop for fusion; pneumatic tourniquet

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                    Surgical time            2.5 h

                                    Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    Closing                  Critical postop splinting
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      Minimal; tourniquet used throughout procedure.

                                    Postop care              PACU → home

                                    Mortality                None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity                Swelling (may require early splitting of dressing)
                                                             Wound infection: Rare (if it occurs, requires removal of prosthesis)
                                                             Prosthesis infection: Rare

                                    Pain score               3–6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                > 50 yr

                                    Male:Female              As in rheumatoid arthritis, females predominate.

                                    Incidence                Uncommon

                                    Etiology                 Rheumatoid arthritis or other connective-tissue disorder
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Associated               As in rheumatoid arthritis (e.g., skin fragility, steroid dependency, immunosuppression)
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.

                                   ARTHRODESIS OF THE WRIST
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: A variety of arthrodeses can be performed about the wrist. These include radiopancarpal arthrodesis
                                   (total wrist fusion) and radiolunate, radioscapholunate, and intercarpal arthrodeses (partial wrist fusions). Radiopan-
                                   carpal arthrodesis is generally performed as a salvage procedure for wrist pathology that cannot be treated with a pro-
                                   cedure that preserves wrist motion. These indications include posttraumatic degenerative arthritis following fractures,
                                   dislocations and ligamentous injuries, idiopathic osteoarthritis, and/or rheumatoid arthritis. Predictable patterns of
                                   arthritis occur as a result of both scapholunate interosseous ligament injury (scapholunate advanced collapse) and
                                   scaphoid nonunion (scaphoid nonunion advanced collapse). As arthritic changes progress patients are no longer candi-
                                   dates for either reconstruction of the ligaments or fixation of the scaphoid. Another alternative to fusion is a proximal

===== PAGE 933 =====
Arthrodesis of the Wrist     933

                   row carpectomy, which is a motion preserving procedure that may be used in patients without advanced capitolunate
                   arthritis. In the nonrheumatoid patient, an effective procedure is an arthrodesis using an iliac crest bone graft fixed
                   with plate and screws. More recent techniques with improved plate designs may not require iliac crest bone graft. As
                   another option, local bone from the distal radius may be utilized. It has been shown that a position of fusion in 10–15°
                   of dorsiflexion provides the greatest grip strength. In the rheumatoid patient, a technique using intramedullary fixa-
                   tion with a large-diameter Steinmann pin is preferred. Rheumatoid bone is osteoporotic, 2° disuse and chronic steroid
                   administration and screw fixation is not ideal in this soft bone. Bone graft is obtained locally in these patients, usually
                   from the resected ulnar head. Radiolunate fusion also is indicated in rheumatoid patients who have progressive ulnar
                   translation of the carpus. The lunate acts to block this translation of the carpus. Radioscapholunate fusion is indicated
                   in patients with radiocarpal arthritis. This procedure preserves about 50% of wrist motion that occurs at the midcarpal
                   joint. Bone graft is necessary and is easily obtained from the distal radius through the same incision. There are a vari-
                   ety of intercarpal arthrodeses, including triscaphe (scaphotrapezial trapezoid), scaphocapitate, lunotriquetral and
                   four-corner (capitate-hamate-triquetral-lunate). These procedures are indicated for the treatment of intercarpal ar-
                   thritis, carpal instabilities due to intercarpal ligament tears, and Kienböck’s disease (aseptic necrosis of the lunate). The
                   Cloward cervical spine fusion instrumentation is useful for obtaining a bicortical plug of bone from the iliac crest
                   with minimal dissection. Local bone graft from the distal radius may be obtained using curettes or larger core needles.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Posttraumatic arthritis; osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis; Kienböck’s disease; carpal
                   instability

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table. The iliac crest may be prepped and elevated
                                             with a sandbag beneath the ipsilateral buttock.

                     Incision                Dorsal wrist, transverse or longitudinal

                     Special                 Pneumatic tourniquet; possibly power for preparation of opposing bone surfaces; K-wires,
                       instrumentation       screws or special instrumentation for fusion

                     Unique                  Bone-graft donor site
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time           2h

                                                                                                                                                          Orthopedic Surgery
                     Tourniquet              150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                     Closing                 Immobilization with splints
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal; procedure is performed under tourniquet control. If iliac crest bone graft is used, there
                                             may be increased blood loss.

                     Postop care             PACU → home, sometimes admission for pain control and elevation

                     Mortality               None associated with procedure

                     Morbidity               Nonunion of fusion: ≤ 20%

                     Pain score              5–7, if no iliac graft; 6–9, if iliac graft used

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               > 40 yr

                     Male:Female             Females predominate in rheumatoid arthritis; males in posttraumatic arthritis.

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Trauma (common); rheumatoid arthritis (common)

                     Associated              Typical for rheumatoid arthritis (e.g., skin fragility, steroid dependency, immunosuppression)
                       conditions

===== PAGE 934 =====
934   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.

                                   Suggested Reading
                                     1. Rizzo M, Cooney WP III: Current concepts and treatment for the rheumatoid wrist. Hand Clin 2011; 27(1):57–72.
                                     2. Wysocki RW, Cohen MS: Complications of limited and total wrist arthrodesis. Hand Clin 2010; 26(2):221–8.

                                   TOTAL WRIST REPLACEMENT
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The major indication for this procedure is rheumatoid arthritis of the wrist. Total wrist replace-
                                   ment (TWR) is often recommended in patients with bilateral wrist disease. An arthrodesis will be carried out on
                                   the nondominant helping hand and a TWR on the dominant hand to preserve dexterity. Many surgeons prefer to
                                   avoid bilateral wrist arthrodesis, although some patients with bilateral fusions have been able to function relatively
                                   well. Currently available protheses are suitable only for low-demand patients and are not indicated for high-demand
                                   patients with posttraumatic arthritis, especially younger patients. These patients will do better with wrist arthrod-
                                   esis. Silastic wrist prostheses are associated with a high failure rate and silicone synovitis, and their use has been
                                   abandoned by many surgeons. The most commonly used prostheses today are metal on ultra-high-molecular-weight
                                   polyethylene articulations that are fixed with methylmethacrylate cement or bone ingrowth into porous stems. The
                                   distal radius articular surface is resected to accept the implant, the proximal carpal row is resected, and the distal
                                   carpus is prepared to accept the distal implant. All of these prostheses depend on intact, normally functioning wrist
                                   extensor tendons, especially the extensor carpi radialis brevis, for balance and function. Absence of this tendon is felt
                                   by many to be an absolute contraindication to this procedure. Because these tendons are so commonly affected by
                                   rheumatoid arthritis, the patient population for this procedure is limited. In addition to functioning tendons, meticu-
                                   lously accurate placement of the components in relation to the centers of rotation of the wrist is critical for success.
                                   If the centers of rotation of the prosthesis do not duplicate those of the normal wrist, early component loosening and
                                   failure is likely. Intraop radiographs are useful in verifying component position. These patients frequently have other
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   upper extremity deformities that will require reconstruction. Because of the complexity of TWR, other reconstruc-
                                   tive procedures are not carried out at the same time.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Rheumatoid arthritis

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                 Dorsal wrist

                                    Special                  TWR instrumentation; power for bone cuts; pneumatic tourniquet
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                    Surgical time            2h

                                    Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    Closing                  Postop splint
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      Minimal; procedure performed under tourniquet control.

                                    Postop care              PACU → home vs admission for pain control and elevation

                                    Mortality                None associated with procedure

===== PAGE 935 =====
Thumb Carpometacarpal Joint Fusion/Arthroplasty/Stabilization              935

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity                Infection: Rare (but requires removal of prosthesis and methylmethacrylate cement, if used)
                                              Poor wound healing

                     Pain score               4–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Rare before 4th decade; most in 6th and 7th decades

                     Male:Female              Females outnumber males, as in rheumatoid arthritis.

                     Incidence                Rare

                     Etiology                 Rheumatoid arthritis

                     Associated               Rheumatoid arthritis
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Weiss AP, Kamal RN, Shultz P: Total wrist arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2013; 21(3):140–8.

                   THUMB CARPOMETACARPAL JOINT FUSION/
                   ARTHROPLASTY/STABILIZATION

                                                                                                                                                           Orthopedic Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Patients with degenerative arthritis of the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint of the thumb present with
                   subluxation, pain, and synovitis of the joint. A synovectomy and ligament reconstruction to restore stability will
                   treat pain and may delay further degeneration. This procedure is performed through a curvilinear incision over the
                   joint. A distally attached graft of the radial 1/2 of the flexor carpi radialis tendon is passed through a drill hole in the
                   base of the metacarpal and woven into the joint capsule. In the later stages of degeneration, patients must be treated
                   with either an arthroplasty or an arthrodesis. For more progressive arthritis a variety of arthroplasty techniques are
                   available to the surgeon; most involve removal of degenerated articular surfaces, soft-tissue interposition and often
                   K-wire fixation to suspend the metacarpal is used. Cemented arthroplasty techniques were initially associated with
                   a high loosening rate and fell out of favor. Newer designs and techniques do not have long-term follow-up yet. The
                   status of the MCP joint of the thumb must be considered prior to CMC intervention. Hyperextension at the MCP
                   joint will increase forces across any CMC procedure.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Some surgeons choose to address CMC arthritis arthroscopically with joint
                   debridement and sometimes material interposition.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Osteoarthritis of CMC joint; basal joint arthritis; synovitis of CMC joint; CMC joint
                   dislocation; trauma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                     Incision                 Curvilinear over joint at base of thumb. If soft-tissue interposition is used, additional incisions
                                              may be required.

===== PAGE 936 =====
936   c h a p t e r 10.1   Hand Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Special               Pneumatic tourniquet; power if K-wire suspension is to be used
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                    Surgical time         1.5–2 h

                                    Tourniquet            150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    EBL                   Minimal; procedures performed under tourniquet control.

                                    Postop care           PACU → home

                                    Mortality             None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity             Nonunion of arthrodesis: ≤ 20%
                                                          Particulate synovitis (silicone rubber prostheses)

                                    Pain score            8–9

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range             Joint stabilization in 3rd–5th decades; arthroplasty and arthrodesis in 5th–8th decades

                                    Male:Female           Basal joint instability and arthritis much more prevalent in women

                                    Incidence             Common

                                    Etiology              Trauma may play a role in producing instability. Intraarticular fracture of the base of the first
                                                          metacarpal with a nonanatomic reduction → incongruence of the joint → posttraumatic arthritis.
                                                          Rheumatoid arthritis → instability and degeneration of the joint. Congenital ligamentous laxity →
                                                          unstable basal joints and arthritis in many patients.

                                    Associated            Rheumatoid arthritis; osteoarthritis; carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
                                      conditions
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR WRIST PROCEDURES
                                   (Procedures covered: Darrach procedure; dorsal stabilization and extensor synovectomy of the rheumatoid
                                   wrist; metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint arthroplasty; arthrodesis of the wrist; total wrist re-
                                   placement; thumb carpometacarpal joint fusion/arthroscopy/stabilization)

                                       PREOPERATIVE

                                   Airway                  Rheumatoid involvement of the C-spine, TMJ, and cricoarytenoid joint (CAJ) are common
                                                           in this patient population. Erosion of cervical vertebrae → unstable C-spine (e.g., atlantoaxial
                                                           subluxation) necessitates extreme care in head and neck manipulation. C-spine fusion (↓ neck
                                                           ROM), TMJ arthritis (↓ mouth opening) and CAJ arthritis (laryngeal narrowing, hoarseness,
                                                           DOE, stridor) portend difficult intubation and may necessitate awake fiberoptic intubation
                                                           (p. B-6). In the case of CAJ arthritis, use of a smaller ETT may be required.

                                   Respiratory             Rheumatoid patients may exhibit Sx of pleural effusion (✓ CXR) or pulmonary fibrosis
                                                           (dyspnea, diffuse rales, ↓ diffusing capacity, honeycomb appearance in CXR).
                                                           Tests: Consider CXR, PFTs, ABGs in affected patients.

                                   Cardiovascular          Rheumatoid patients may suffer from pericarditis, myocarditis, valvular disease, and cardi-
                                                           ac conduction defects. Because of the physical limitations imposed by the disease process,
                                                           it may prove difficult to evaluate these patients’ cardiovascular status; hence, cardiology
                                                           consultation, ECG, and ECHO may be useful in preparing for surgery.
                                                           Tests: Consider ECG and ECHO, especially in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis.

===== PAGE 937 =====
Thumb Carpometacarpal Joint Fusion/Arthroplasty/Stabilization             937

                    Neurological             Rheumatoid patients may have cervical or lumbar radiculopathies that should be docu-
                                             mented carefully preop. In addition, peripheral neuropathy with consequent sensory/
                                             motor defects may be present.
                                             Tests: Consider C-spine radiographs to r/o occult subluxations in rheumatoid patients
                                             with neck pain or upper extremity radiculopathy.

                    Musculoskeletal          Bony deformities or muscle contractures may necessitate special attention to positioning.

                    Hematologic              Anemia, eosinophilia, and thrombocytosis may be present. Venous access may be dif-
                                             ficult 2° vasculitis and ↑ skin fragility (steroid-induced). Virtually all of these patients
                                             will be on some type of anti-inflammatory medication that may result in anemia or
                                             Plt inhibition. Ideally, patients should discontinue NSAIDs at least 5 d preop; aspirin,
                                             7 d preop.

                    Endocrine                Rheumatoid patients may be on oral corticosteroids and require supplemental periop ste-
                                             roids (e.g., 100 mg hydrocortisone q 8 h iv) to treat adrenal suppression, although the rou-
                                             tine use of “stress-dose steroids” has been questioned.

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct serves as a minimum in otherwise healthy rheumatoid patients. Severe rheuma-
                                             toid patients may require more extensive testing to screen for drug effects, etc. (e.g., serum
                                             electrolytes; glucose; kidney function tests; LFTs).

                    Premedication            Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100 mcg
                                             iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Regional anesthesia, GA, or a combination of the two is commonly used. A brachial plex-
                   us block via the supraclavicular, axillary, or infraclavicular approach is excellent for this procedure; it is a means
                   of avoiding tracheal intubation for GA if airway difficulty is anticipated. Furthermore, it decreases admission rate,
                   speeds discharge from PACU in day surgery setting, and increases patient satisfaction. Intravenous regional anes-
                   thesia (Bier block) is most useful for short procedures (< 1 h). If regional anesthesia is contraindicated, rheumatoid
                   patients may require awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6).

                                                                                                                                                     Orthopedic Surgery
                   Regional anesthesia: 1.5% mepivacaine, 30–40 mL for routine, superficial cases; 0.5% bupivacaine, or 0.5% ropi-
                   vacaine, 30–40 mL for procedures > 2.5 h or if extended analgesia is desired. Epinephrine (2.5–5 mcg/mL) may be
                   added to decrease peak plasma concentrations of local anesthetics, although its use is controversial.

                    Ultrasound-               Ultrasound-guided brachial plexus using supraclavicular, infraclavicular, or axillary
                       guided                a pproaches are all suitable for surgery below the shoulder. The infraclavicular approach
                       brachial               is the most effective for placement of peripheral nerve catheters. The supraclavicular ap-
                       plexus block           proach is associated with phrenic nerve blockade in 50% of patients and should be avoided
                                              in patients with respiratory compromise.

                    Axillary block           Infrequently used for these procedures given the superiority of a brachial plexus
                                             block. To provide similar coverage, an axillary block usually requires supplemental
                                             blocks for the intercostobrachial nerve (T2) and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the
                                             forearm.

                    Bier block               The Bier block (intravenous regional anesthesia) is a technique for short (< 60 min) wrist
                                             and hand surgeries. 40–50 mL of 0.5% lidocaine is commonly used. For short procedures
                                             (< 30 min) consider reducing the dose of iv anesthetic (e.g., 25 mL of 0.5% lidocaine) and
                                             using a forearm tourniquet instead of an upper arm tourniquet. The OR staff should be
                                             alerted that iv regional anesthesia is being used, so that all are ready to proceed after
                                             the tourniquet is inflated (i.e., surgical prep ready to be performed; surgeons scrubbed,
                                             gowned, and gloved). Tourniquet pain and postop pain are reduced by adding ketorolac
                                             (20 mg) or clonidine (1 mcg/kg) to the lidocaine solution.

===== PAGE 938 =====
938   c h a p t e r 10.1   Hand Surgery

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction               Standard induction (p. B-2) in patients with normal airways

                                   Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                                   Emergence               Skin closure frequently is followed by application of a splint, and the patient should remain
                                                           anesthetized during the splinting procedure. Cases with difficult airways require awake
                                                           extubation.

                                   Blood and fluid         Minimal blood loss                     IV placed in the contralateral upper extremity.
                                      requirements         IV: 18 ga × 1
                                                           NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                                   Positioning             Special handling required.             As with nearly all orthopedic cases, positioning
                                                           3 and pad pressure points              is a subtle, yet crucial aspect of anesthetic man-
                                                           3 eyes                                 agement. Rheumatoid patients may have con-
                                                           3 C-spine instability                  tractures that require special attention. Steroid-
                                                                                                  dependent patients require special handling be-
                                                                                                  cause of fragile skin.

                                   Brachial plexus         Local anesthetic toxicity
                                     block                 Inadequate block                       Less frequent occurrence, compared with axillary
                                     complications         Intravascular injection                block.
                                                           Pneumothorax                           Pneumothorax is very rare.
                                                           Persistent paresthesia

                                   Axillary block          Local anesthetic toxicity              Minimal doses of local anesthetic can cause CNS
                                     complications         Inadequate block                       toxicity if reverse flow occurs during an intraarte-
                                                           Intravascular injection                rial injection.
                                                           Persistent paresthesia
                                                           Axillary hematoma
                                                           Axillary artery thrombosis             Axillary thrombosis is extremely rare.
                                                           Local anesthetic toxicity              Proper exsanguination and tourniquet function is
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Bier block
                                      complications        Inadequate block                       critical. Upper arm torniquet should remain inflated
                                                           Thrombophlebitis                       a minimum of 25 min. Systemic toxic reaction to the
                                                                                                  local anesthetic may occur as a result of tourniquet
                                                                                                  leak or inadvertent premature (< 20 min) upper arm
                                                                                                  tourniquet release. Treatment is supportive. Sz are
                                                                                                  controlled with midazolam, with appropriate airway
                                                                                                  protection. Rx severe toxicity with Intralipid® 20%
                                                                                                  1.5 mL/kg iv. Even with a functioning tourniquet,
                                                                                                  it is possible to overcome tourniquet pressure by
                                                                                                  injecting too vigorously. Care must be taken when
                                                                                                  switching from proximal to distal upper arm tourni-
                                                                                                  quet; never deflate proximal tourniquet until verify-
                                                                                                  ing that distal tourniquet is working.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Pain                    PCA (p. C-3), in combination with      Regional or combined regional-general anesthetic
                                     management            regional block                         techniques are excellent for wrist procedures, es-
                                                                                                  pecially with respect to postop pain management.

                                   Tests                   None routinely indicated.

===== PAGE 939 =====
Excision of Ganglion of the Wrist         939

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Arslanian B, Mehrzad R, Kramer T, Kim DC: Forearm Bier block: a new regional anesthetic technique for upper extremity
                        surgery. Ann Plast Surg 2013. [Epub ahead of print]
                     2. Falcão LF, Perez MV, de Castro I, Yamashita AM, Tardelli MA, Amaral JL: Minimum effective volume of 0.5% bupivacaine
                        with epinephrine in ultrasound-guided interscalene brachial plexus block. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(3):450–5.
                     3. Green DP, Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, et al, eds: Operative Hand Surgery, 5th edition. Elsevier, New York: 2005.
                     4. Halaszynski TM: Ultrasound brachial plexus anesthesia and analgesia for upper extremity surgery: essentials of our current
                        understanding, 2011. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(5):581–91.
                     5. Keenan MA, Stiles CM, Kaufman RL: Acquired laryngeal deviation associated with cervical spine disease in erosive
                        polyarticular arthritis. Anesthesiology 1983; 58(5):441–9.
                     6. Lee HJ, Cho YJ, Gong HS, Rhee SH, Park HS, Baek GH: The effect of buffered lidocaine in local anesthesia: a prospective,
                        randomized, double-blind study. J Hand Surg Am 2013; 38(5):471–5.
                     7. Marhofer P, Chan VW: Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia: current concepts and future trends. Anesth Analg 2007;
                        104(5):1265–9.
                     8. Steinberg RB: The dose-response relationship of ketorolac as a component of intravenous regional anesthesia with lidocaine.
                        Anesth Analg 1998; 86(4):791–3.
                     9. Ustuner E, Yilmaz A, Ozgencil E, Okten F, Turhan SC: Ultrasound anatomy of the brachial plexus nerves in the neurovascular
                        bundle at the axilla in patients undergoing upper-extremity block anesthesia. Skeletal Radiol 2013; 42(5):707–13.
                    10. White RH: Preoperative evaluation of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Semin Arthritis Rheum 1985; 14(4):287–99.

                   EXCISION OF GANGLION OF THE WRIST
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ganglion cysts about the wrist most commonly occur dorsally, originating from the scapholunate
                   joint. The second most common site is volar to the scaphotrapezial joint. To prevent recurrence, these synovial fluid-
                   filled outpouchings of the joint capsule must be excised completely. This requires isolating the stalk of the cyst to
                   its origin and excising a small cuff of normal joint capsule with the cyst. The joint, therefore, must be entered for a
                   complete excision. For patients with dorsal ganglia who have considerable preoperative pain a posterior interosseous
                   neurectomy may be done at the same time as the excision. Older studies found that the recurrence rate was decreased

                                                                                                                                                             Orthopedic Surgery
                   by the use of GA, as opposed to local or regional anesthetics. This was due to the fact that a more complete excision
                   was performed when the patient was under GA. Hand specialists today feel that regional anesthetics are quite ac-
                   ceptable for this procedure, as long as the surgeon performs a meticulous excision. Volar wrist ganglions commonly
                   are near the radial artery, which is at risk during excision. A preop Allen test should be performed to ensure that, if
                   the radial artery is interrupted, there will not be ischemia in the hand. Primary small dorsal ganglions may be ap-
                   proached arthroscopically.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ganglion cyst, primary or recurrent

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                     Incision                 Longitudinal or transverse directly over cyst

                     Special                  Pneumatic tourniquet
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time            0.5–1.5 h

                     Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                     Closing                  Routine skin closure. Large recurrent cysts may require a repair of the wrist capsule. Splint
                       considerations         applied in OR.

                     EBL                      Minimal; performed under tourniquet control.

===== PAGE 940 =====
940   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Postop care              PACU → home

                                    Mortality                None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity                Injury to radial artery: Rare (Because of the vascular interconnections between radial and ulnar
                                                             arteries, loss of radial artery flow rarely → complications.)

                                    Pain score               2–4

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                Adults

                                    Male:Female              1:1

                                    Incidence                Very common

                                    Etiology                 Unknown. Trauma has been associated with ~50% of ganglion cysts. Underlying carpal
                                                             instabilities, such as scapholunate instability, have been implicated.

                                    Associated               Carpal instability; trauma (wrist sprains and strains)
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Flexor Tendon Laceration, p. 943.

                                   PALMAR AND DIGITAL FASCIECTOMY
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: This procedure is indicated for the treatment of Dupuytren’s contractures of the digits, which produces
                                   a neoplastic thickening of the palmar and digital fascia. These pathologic cords (whose active cell is the myofibro-
                                   blast) contract and, through their connections with the skin, tendon sheath, and phalangeal bone, cause flexion
                                   contractures of the metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal, and distal interphalangeal joints. The disease is
                                   progressive, and the only treatment is surgical excision of the fascia. Research into nonsurgical options for treatment
                                   is ongoing; some surgeons perform needle aponeurectomy, which incises the diseased fascia but does not remove
                                   it. In addition to the pathologic changes in the fascia of the hands, many patients also have thickening of the plantar
                                   fascia of the foot (Ledderhose disease) and the dorsal fascia of the penis (Peyronie’s disease). Patients with severe
                                   contractures that have been neglected may require amputation. Because the pathologic fascia is so intimately con-
                                   nected to the skin, it is sometimes necessary to excise the skin and replace it with full-thickness skin grafts. The groin
                                   is an excellent donor site for these grafts.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Dupuytren’s contracture

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                 Transverse or longitudinal palmar. Groin may be used as a full-thickness skin graft donor site.

                                    Antibiotics              Cephazolin 1g iv

                                    Surgical time            1–3 h

===== PAGE 941 =====
Repair of Lacerated Tendons/Nerves          941

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Tourniquet              150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min. Because of the need to deflate tourniquet so that
                                             hemostasis can be obtained, Bier block is not suitable.

                     Closing                 Must obtain meticulous hemostasis. Z-plasties and skin grafts used frequently.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal; dissection done under tourniquet control. A small amount of blood loss occurs when
                                             tourniquet is released and hemostasis is obtained.

                     Postop care             PACU → home

                     Mortality               None associated with procedure

                     Morbidity               Hematoma (usually requires operative intervention)
                                             Skin necrosis (may require secondary skin grafting)
                                             Digital nerve and artery injury (Vascular injuries typically recognized immediately. An operating
                                             microscope may be needed, and the procedure will be prolonged.)
                                             Reflex-sympathetic dystrophy (so-called sympathetic flare reaction; requires prompt treatment,
                                             including stellate ganglion blockade)

                    Pain score               7–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Typically, 40–60 yr

                     Male:Female             More common in males

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Definite heritance—associated with strong family Hx. Ethnic diathesis for northern Europeans
                                             with fair hair and skin, blue eyes. Almost never seen in Blacks. Experimental studies suggest that
                                             microhematomas 2° repetitive trauma may be important in the disease process.

                     Associated              Cigarette smoking; alcoholism; antiseizure medications
                       conditions

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Flexor Tendon Laceration, p. 943.

                   REPAIR OF LACERATED TENDONS/NERVES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The prognosis and difficulty of a flexor tendon repair depends on the anatomic site of the laceration.
                   There are five zones of injury in the upper extremity (Fig. 10.1-3). Zone I is distal to the flexor digitorum superficialis
                   (FDS) tendon insertion and involves only the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon. Zone II extends from the
                   entrance to the fibroosseous sheath at the metacarpal head to the FDS insertion. Lacerations usually involve both the
                   FDS and FDP. These are the most difficult to repair and have the worst prognosis, as the tendons are apt to become
                   scarred to each other and limit gliding. Zone III is the palm; Zone IV is at the level of the carpal canal; and Zone 5
                   is in the forearm. Lacerations in these areas are easier to repair and have good prognoses for restoration of tendon
                   gliding and, thus, digit motion. Associated injuries to the neural structures are common. Digital nerve lacerations are
                   seen in Zone II; median or ulnar nerve injuries, in Zone IV and proximal. Lacerations to the dorsal side of the hand
                   involving the extensor tendons may be repaired in the emergency room as they often do not involve neurovascular

===== PAGE 942 =====
942   c h a p t e r 10.1     Hand Surgery

                                             Figure 10.1-3. Zone classification of flexor tendon injuries. (Reproduced with
                                             permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition.
                                             Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2003.)

                                   structures, and the extensor digitorum communis tendon as well as the junctura tendinea may prevent retraction of
                                   the proximal tendon into the forearm. The exception to this is the thumb and radial dorsal hand, where the extensor
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   and abductor tendons may retract, and the dorsal sensory branch of the radial nerve is at risk.
                                   In general, nerve injuries are repaired at the time of the tendon repair. Depending on the surgeon, an operating mi-
                                   croscope or loupe magnification may be used. Tendons lacerated in the finger are often pulled back into the palm by
                                   muscular contraction. A palmar incision is required to retrieve the tendon, which must then be threaded carefully
                                   through the pulleys in the digit. Suture techniques for tendon repair create a juncture that is far weaker than an intact
                                   tendon. For this reason, the juncture must be protected from mechanical stress for a period of 8 wk or more. This is
                                   done by splinting the hand with the wrist and digits flexed so that the pull on the tendon by its muscle is limited. It is
                                   important that the patient emerges gently from anesthesia to limit the stress on the repair. The best results are obtained
                                   when repair is carried out within 7 d of the injury, although primary repair can be performed up to 3 wk. After 7 d, the
                                   muscle begins to undergo irreversible contracture. If the flexor tendon is advanced after this has occurred, a flexion
                                   contracture results. If a flexor tendon laceration is neglected, a palm-to-fingertip tendon graft, using a different flexor
                                   tendon, should be performed. If the tendon bed is suitable for gliding, the graft can be accomplished in one stage. If not,
                                   a Silastic tendon spacer (rubber rod) must be placed at the first stage; 6–8 wk later, a palm-to-fingertip graft is placed in
                                   the bed prepared with the Silastic rod. Tendon graft donor sites include the palmaris longus tendon and toe extensors.
                                   A variant of the sharp flexor tendon laceration is the FDP avulsion from its insertion in Zone 1. This is the so-called jer-
                                   sey finger— initially named for the classic mechanism of someone grasping the jersey of a ball carrier. This injury occurs
                                   during forceful grasp and most commonly affects the ring finger. The FDP tendon retracts to various predictable levels
                                   per the classification system of Leddy. Type I retracts in to the palm; this injury is most likely to disrupt the blood supply
                                   to the tendon via the vinculae. Type II retracts to the level of the PIP joint, and type III retracts to the level of the DIP
                                   joint. In general, these injuries should be explored and repaired within 7 days. Repair may require mini-suture anchors
                                   or a button/pullout suture through the nail/distal phalanx because there is not sufficient tendon distally for a primary
                                   repair. If neglected, these patients should be treated with a distal interphalangeal (DIP) arthrodesis. A flexor tendon
                                   graft through an intact FDS tendon usually is not indicated because tendon adhesions will commonly interfere with

===== PAGE 943 =====
Repair of Lacerated Tendons/Nerves     943

                   the function of the FDS, leading to decreased overall active motion of the digit. The most common complication is the
                   development of tendon adhesions, which limit tendon gliding and digit motion. If these patients fail to improve within
                   a 3- to 6-mo course of physical therapy, they require an operative tendolysis to lyse the adhesions.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Flexor tendon laceration; FDP avulsion (“jersey finger”); digital nerve laceration; median
                   nerve laceration

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table. The foot may be prepped for a graft.

                     Incision               Zig-zag (Brunner) within the digits, extensile approach hand or wrist

                     Special                Pneumatic tourniquet, possibly operating microscope for nerve injuries
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time          1–2 h; may be extended for nerve repair and treatment of associated injuries.

                     Closing                Tendon and nerve repairs must be protected with splints before emergence from GA. Smooth
                       considerations       extubation (see Emergence, below).

                     EBL                    Minimal; procedure performed under tourniquet control

                     Postop care            PACU → home

                     Mortality              None associated with procedure.

                     Morbidity              Tendon adhesions: 25%
                                            Rupture of tendon repair: < 5%
                                            Infection: Rare

                     Pain score             2–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Adult population, rarely children.

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                     Male:Female            Slight male predominance, due to occupational injuries

                     Incidence              Not uncommon

                     Etiology               Trauma

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: excision of ganglion of the wrist; palmar and digital fasciectomy; repair of flexor tendon
                   laceration)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The majority of patients presenting for these procedures are usually otherwise healthy. Many of them present for
                   elective surgery as a result of progressive functional impairment and pain, and preop workup is routine.

                    Neurological             If regional anesthesia is contemplated, preexisting sensory or motor defects should be
                                             documented carefully.

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct (healthy patients); otherwise, as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication            Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100 mcg
                                             iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

===== PAGE 944 =====
944   c h a p t e r 10.1   Hand Surgery

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Regional anesthesia (most common), GA, or a combination of the two may be used.
                                   Intravenous regional anesthesia (Bier block) is most useful for short procedures that last for < 1 h (see Anesthetic
                                   Considerations, p. 948). A brachial plexus block via the axillary, infraclavicular, or supraclavicular approach is ex-
                                   cellent for this procedure. Because most of these procedures are done on an outpatient basis, brachial plexus block
                                   without GA is usually preferred to promote early “street-readiness.”
                                   Regional anesthesia: 1.5% mepivacaine 30–40 mL with alkalization for routine, superficial cases; 0.5% bupivacaine
                                   or 0.5% ropivacaine 30–40 mL for procedures > 2.5 h or if extended analgesia is desired. Epinephrine (2.5–5 mcg/mL)
                                   may be added to decrease peak plasma concentrations of local anesthetics (controversial).

                                   Ultrasound-               Ultrasound-guided brachial plexus using supraclavicular, infraclavicular, or axillary ap-
                                      guided                 proaches are all suitable for surgery below the shoulder. The infraclavicular approach is the
                                      brachial               most effective for placement of peripheral nerve catheters. The supraclavicular approach
                                      plexus block           is associated with phrenic nerve blockade in 50% of patients and should be avoided in pa-
                                                             tients with respiratory compromise.

                                   Infraclavicular           The coracoid approach using nerve stimulation is a safe and effective regional technique
                                      block                  when ultrasound guidance is unavailable. A single injection will provide anesthesia dis-
                                                             tal to the midhumerus. No additional injections are necessary, and the patient’s arm does
                                                             not need to be abducted for block placement. If intraop sedation is necessary, propofol
                                                             (50–100 mcg/kg/min) by continuous infusion or intermittent bolus injection of opioid/
                                                             benzodiazepine are good choices.

                                   Axillary block            Infrequently used for these procedures given the superiority of a brachial plexus block. To
                                                             provide similar coverage, an axillary block usually requires supplemental blocks for the
                                                             intercostobrachial nerve (T2) and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

                                   Bier block                The Bier block (intravenous regional anesthesia) is useful for short (< 60 min), wrist and
                                                             hand surgeries. 40–50 mL of 0.5% lidocaine is commonly used. For short procedures
                                                             (< 30 min) consider reducing the dose of iv anesthetic (e.g., 25 mL 0.5% lidocaine) and using
                                                             a forearm tourniquet instead of an upper arm tourniquet. The OR staff should be alerted
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                             that iv regional anesthesia is being used, so that all are ready to proceed after the tourni-
                                                             quet is inflated (i.e., surgical prep ready to be performed; surgeons scrubbed, gowned, and
                                                             gloved). Tourniquet pain and postop pain is reduced by adding ketorolac (20 mg) or cloni-
                                                             dine (1 mcg/kg) to the lidocaine solution.

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                 Standard induction (p. B-2)

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                                   Emergence                 Standard emergence (p. B-4). Skin closure is frequently followed by application of a splint;
                                                             patient should remain anesthetized during splinting procedure.

                                   Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss                     An 18-ga iv catheter placed in the contralateral
                                      requirements           IV: 18 ga × 1                          upper extremity should be adequate.
                                                             NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                                   Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                                             3 eyes

===== PAGE 945 =====
Repair of Lacerated Tendons/Nerves             945

                    Supraclavicular            Inadequate block                          Ulnar nerve sparing
                      block                    Intravascular injection
                      complications            Persistent paresthesia
                                               Local anesthetic toxicity
                                               Pneumothorax
                                               Phrenic nerve block                       Respiratory impairment possible

                    Infraclavicular            Inadequate block                          Less frequent occurrence, compared with axillary
                       block                   Intravascular injection                   block.
                       complications           Pneumothorax                              Pneumothorax is very rare
                                               Phrenic nerve block                       Usually asymptomatic. Incidence ≤ 50%
                                               Persistent paresthesia
                                               Local anesthetic toxicity

                    Axillary block             Local anesthetic toxicity                 Minimal doses of local anesthetic can cause CNS
                      complications            Intravascular injection                   toxicity during an accidental intravascular injec-
                                               Inadequate block                          tion. Sz should be treated with midazolam titrated
                                               Persistent paresthesia                    to effect, accompanied by airway control. Rx severe
                                               Axillary hematoma                         toxicity with Intralipid® 20% 1.5 mL/kg iv, initially.
                                               Axillary artery thrombosis                If there is any question of a full stomach, intubation
                                                                                         should be accomplished rapidly. Axillary thrombosis
                                                                                         is very rare.

                    Bier block                 Local anesthetic toxicity                 Proper exsanguination and tourniquet function is
                       complications           Inadequate block                          critical. Upper arm tourniquet should remain in-
                                               Thrombophlebitis                          flated a minimum of 25 min. Systemic toxic reac-
                                                                                         tion to the local anesthetic may occur as a result of
                                                                                         upper arm tourniquet leak or inadvertent pre-
                                                                                         mature (< 20 min) upper arm tourniquet release.
                                                                                         Treatment is supportive. Sz are controlled with
                                                                                         midazolam, with appropriate airway protection.
                                                                                         Even with a functioning tourniquet, it is possible
                                                                                         to overcome tourniquet pressure by injecting too
                                                                                         vigorously. Care must be taken when switching

                                                                                                                                                             Orthopedic Surgery
                                                                                         from proximal to distal upper arm tourniquet;
                                                                                         never deflate proximal tourniquet until verifying
                                                                                         that distal tourniquet is working.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain                       Oral analgesics are usually sufficient.   The lingering analgesia of the brachial plexus block
                      management                                                         is often sufficient for pain relief in the recovery
                                                                                         room; oral analgesic therapy can be instituted prior
                                                                                         to discharging patient to home.

                    Tests                      None routinely indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Arslanian B, Mehrzad R, Kramer T, Kim DC: Forearm Bier block: a new regional anesthetic technique for upper extremity
                        surgery. Ann Plast Surg 2013. [Epub ahead of print]
                     2. Halaszynski TM: Ultrasound brachial plexus anesthesia and analgesia for upper extremity surgery: essentials of our current
                        understanding, 2011. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(5):581–91.
                     3. Steinberg RB: The dose-response relationship of ketorolac as a component of intravenous regional anesthesia with lidocaine.
                        Anesth Analg 1998; 86(4):791–3.
                     4. Ustener E, Yilmaz A, Ozgencil E, Okten F, Turhan SC: Ultrasound anatomy of the brachial plexus nerves in the neurovascular
                        bundle at the axilla in patients undergoing upper-extremity block anesthesia. Skeletal Radiol 2013; 42(5):707–13.

===== PAGE 946 =====
946   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                   WRIST ARTHROSCOPY/REPAIR OF TRIANGULAR
                                   FIBROCARTILAGE COMPLEX TEARS
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Wrist arthroscopy may be performed for either diagnostic or therapeutic indications. A smaller
                                   diameter version of the standard arthroscope is used for visualizing the wrist joint. All of the entry portals are on the
                                   dorsum of the wrist and course between the extensor compartments. Irrigation is used during the procedure, and
                                   a cannula is routinely placed ulnar to the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon. Unlike the knee joint, where visualization
                                   is obtained by distention of the joint, in-the-wrist visualization is obtained by distraction. The digits are placed in
                                   finger traps, and up to 10 lb of traction can be placed on the wrist. Specialized instrumentation is available to resect
                                   and debride intraarticular structures and to place sutures to repair torn ligaments. The triangular fibrocartilage
                                   complex is a source of ulnar-sided wrist pain. It is a term given to the soft tissues spanning the distal radioulnar
                                   joint. It is composed of the articular disk, radioulnar ligaments, ulnocarpal ligaments, extensor carpi ulnaris tendon
                                   sheath, and meniscus homologue. Advances in both imaging and arthroscopic techniques in the recent past have led
                                   to our ability to better treat patients with injuries to the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). The classifica-
                                   tion of these injuries credited to Palmer involves both traumatic and degenerative tears, which are associated with
                                   ulnar positive variance and ulnar impaction or impingement syndrome. If an open procedure, such as repair of an
                                   intercarpal ligament or an ulnar shortening procedure, is contemplated following diagnostic arthroscopy, either GA
                                   or regional block is preferred.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: The standard approach is to suspend the forearm vertically in traction. The
                                   forearm also can be placed horizontally on the hand table in traction.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Internal derangement of the wrist of unknown etiology; tears of the triangular fibrocar-
                                   tilage complex; intercarpal instability due to intercarpal ligament tears; scapholunate dissociation; lunotriquetral
                                   dissociation; fracture of distal radius; ulnar impingement syndrome.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Incision                 Small incisions are made on the dorsum of the wrist for instrument insertion.

                                    Special                  2.7-mm diameter arthroscope, 0 or 30° field of view; light source and video camera; television
                                      instrumentation        monitor; surgical power shaver; joint irrigation system; traction device for forearm; pneumatic
                                                             tourniquet

                                    Unique                   Patient is often awake and observes surgery on monitor.
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin l g iv

                                    Surgical time            30 min–2 h

                                    Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    Closing                  Arthroscopic portals are each closed with a single skin suture.
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      Minimal; procedure performed with tourniquet control.

                                    Postop care              PACU → home

                                    Mortality                None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity                Infection: < 1%
                                                             Swelling (2° to irrigation fluid): Common
                                                             Nerve and artery damage: Uncommon

                                    Pain score               1–3

===== PAGE 947 =====
Carpal Tunnel Release    947

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Adults

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Least common form of arthroscopy

                     Etiology                See Usual preop diagnosis, above.

                     Associated              Antecedent trauma
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Carpal Tunnel Release, p. 948.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Ahsan ZS, Yao J: Complications of wrist arthroscopy. Arthroscopy 2012; 28(6):855–9.
                     2. Wolf JM, Dukas A, Pensak M: Advances in wrist arthroscopy. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2012; 20(11):725–34.

                   CARPAL TUNNEL RELEASE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: This is the most commonly performed procedure in hand surgery. It consists of the transection of
                   the transverse carpal ligament through either an open-palmar or an endoscopic approach (Fig. 10.1-4). In patients
                   with severe synovitis, as in rheumatoid arthritis, a synovectomy should be performed at the same time. If there is
                   advanced thenar atrophy and weakness of thumb opposition, a tendon transfer may be done at that time. The most
                   common transfer is the Camitz opponensplasty, in which the palmaris longus tendon is prolonged with palmar fas-

                                                                                                                                                    Orthopedic Surgery
                   cia and transferred to the thumb. Transfers of the extensor indicis proprius and superficial flexor tendons also can be
                   performed. Surgeons differ in their approach to anesthesia for this procedure: some prefer local infiltration, whereas
                   others prefer regional as there is less fluid edema.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS); median nerve compression at the wrist

                                Figure 10.1-4. Exposure of the carpal tunnel. (Reproduced with permission from
                                Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams
                                & Wilkins: 2003.)

===== PAGE 948 =====
948   c h a p t e r 10.1   Hand Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                          Open Carpal Tunnel Release                       Endoscopic Carpal Tunnel Release

                                    Position              Supine                                           ⇐

                                    Incision              Longitudinal incision in palm; may extend to     2 cm transverse at proximal flexion crease
                                                          forearm.                                         of wrist; some use a distal palmar incision
                                                                                                           also

                                    Special               Pneumatic tourniquet                             Endoscopic carpal tunnel release system:
                                      instrumentation                                                      endoscope, sheath and trocar, special cutting
                                                                                                           tools

                                    Unique                Although rare, damage to neurovascular           Danger of intraop injury to digital nerves,
                                      considerations      structures                                       median nerve, tendons, superficial vascular
                                                                                                           arch

                                    Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv                                 ⇐

                                    Surgical time         30–90 min                                        30 min

                                    Tourniquet            150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min          ⇐

                                    Closing               Simple skin closure, some surgeons will splint   ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                   Minimal; performed under tourniquet control.     Minimal

                                    Postop care           PACU → home                                      ⇐

                                    Mortality             None associated with procedure                   ⇐

                                    Morbidity             Overall complication rate: 4%                    ⇐
                                                          Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD): < 5%         Rare
                                                          Hematoma: Rare                                   Complications of ulnar nerve palsy < 5%
                                                          Infection: Uncommon                              Tendon and nerve laceration: Rare (< 1%)
                                                                                                           Vascular injury: Less common than nerve
                                                                                                           injury
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Pain score            1 –2                                             1–2

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range             20–80 yr; 50% are 40–60 yr

                                    Male:Female           1:2

                                    Incidence             Common

                                    Etiology              Compression of the median nerve within the carpal tunnel by synovitis; mass effect 2° tumor or
                                                          fracture fragments, peripheral neuropathy, gout, anomalous structures, thrombosis of a persis-
                                                          tent median artery, and idiopathic; repetitive trauma (e.g., computer use)

                                    Associated            Rheumatoid arthritis; thyroid imbalance; diabetes; amyloidosis; multiple myeloma; alcohol-
                                      conditions          ism; hemophilia; pregnancy; menopause; gout; fractures of the distal radius; Kienböck’s
                                                          disease

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   (Procedures covered: tendolysis of flexor or extensor tendon; wrist arthroscopy; carpal tunnel release)

===== PAGE 949 =====
Carpal Tunnel Release       949

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   In general, there are two patient populations involved: (a) healthy patients with Hx of wrist trauma, and (b) rheuma-
                   toid patients. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936, for discussion of preop concerns in the
                   rheumatoid patient.)

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct (healthy patients); otherwise, as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100 mcg
                                             iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Intravenous regional anesthesia is suitable only for procedures that are < 1 h. For longer
                   procedures, an axillary, supraclavicular, or infraclavicular brachial plexus block are good alternatives. Regional tech-
                   niques are especially appropriate for outpatients.

                    Intravenous              The Bier block (intravenous regional anesthesia) is for short (< 60 min), superficial
                       regional block        wrist and hand surgeries. 40–50 mL of 0.5% lidocaine is commonly used. A very brief
                                             operative procedure may be an indication to reduce the dose of iv anesthetic agent by,
                                             for example, having the surgeon use a forearm tourniquet instead of an upper-arm
                                             tourniquet. The OR staff should be alerted that iv regional anesthesia is being used, so
                                             that all are ready to proceed after the tourniquet is inflated (i.e., surgical prep ready to
                                             be performed; surgeons scrubbed, gowned, and gloved). Tourniquet pain and postop
                                             pain are reduced by adding ketorolac (20 mg) or clonidine (1 mcg/kg) to the lidocaine
                                             solution.

                    Blood and fluid          Minimal blood loss                      An 18-ga iv catheter placed in the nonoperative
                       requirements          IV: 18 ga × 1                           upper extremity should be adequate.
                                             NS/LR @ 1.5–2 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                             3 eyes

                                                                                                                                                     Orthopedic Surgery
                    Intravenous              Local anesthetic toxicity               Proper exsanguination and tourniquet function are
                       regional block        Inadequate block                        critical. A tourniquet should remain inflated a mini-
                       complications         Thrombophlebitis                        mum of 25 min. Systemic toxic reaction to the local
                                                                                     anesthetic may occur as a result of tourniquet leak
                                                                                     or inadvertent premature (< 20 min) tourniquet
                                                                                     release. Treatment is supportive. Sz are controlled
                                                                                     with midazolam, with appropriate airway protec-
                                                                                     tion. Even with a functioning tourniquet, it is pos-
                                                                                     sible to overcome tourniquet pressure by injecting
                                                                                     too vigorously. Care must be taken when switching
                                                                                     from proximal to distal tourniquet; never deflate
                                                                                     proximal tourniquet until verifying that distal tour-
                                                                                     niquet is working.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain                     Oral analgesics usually sufficient      Residual analgesia with iv regional anesthesia is
                      management                                                     minimal unless ketorolac or clonidine is used. Some
                                                                                     iv opioid may be necessary until the patient is toler-
                                                                                     ating fluids in the recovery room.

                    Tests                    None routinely indicated

===== PAGE 950 =====
950   c h a p t e r 10.1     Hand Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Grice SC, Morell RC, Balestrieri FJ, et al: Intravenous regional anesthesia: evaluation and prevention of leakage under the
                                        tourniquet. Anesthesiology 1986; 65(3):316–20.
                                     2. Maga JM, Cooper L, Gebhard RE: Outpatient regional anesthesia for upper extremity surgery update (2005 to present) distal
                                        to shoulder. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 50(1):47–55.
                                     3. Mintalucci DJ, Leinberry CF Jr: Open versus endoscopic carpal tunnel release. Orthop Clin North Am 2012; 43(4):431–7.
                                     4. Nouette-Gaulain K, Capdevila X, Rossignol R: Local anesthetic 'in-situ' toxicity during peripheral nerve blocks: update on
                                        mechanisms and prevention. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(5):589–95.
                                     5. Sukhani R, Garcia CJ, Munhall RJ, et al: Lidocaine disposition following intravenous regional anesthesia with different
                                        tourniquet deflation technics. Anesth Analg 1989; 68(5):633–7.

                                   FIXATION OF FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS OF
                                   THE WRIST AND HAND
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Patients with fractures of the distal radius, distal ulna, carpus, metacarpals, and phalanges that can-
                                   not be treated adequately with closed methods require fixation. Difficult fractures may require a combination of
                                   techniques such as percutaneous pinning or external fixation in addition to open reduction and internal fixation
                                   (ORIF). The criteria for adequate treatment include anatomic reduction of the fracture fragments with focus on
                                   articular congruity and stable fixation for maintenance of this reduction. Cast/splint treatment or fixation of any
                                   kind is an effort to decrease motion at the fracture site and allow the body to produce a bony union with acceptable
                                   length, alignment, and rotation. Patients with carpal/wrist fractures or dislocations may have signs of neurologic
                                   compromise, specifically the median nerve. Often a closed reduction will improve these symptoms, but if not urgent
                                   operative treatment is indicated. Most dislocations within the hand are reducible in the emergency room setting with
                                   adequate anesthesia; there are irreducible varieties that warrant immediate operative treatment. Vascular compro-
                                   mise of the hand associated with these injuries is rare, usually occurring in patients with severe crush or high-energy
                                   injuries. The devascularized hand is a surgical emergency, and revascularization must be carried out as soon as possi-
                                   ble. High-energy injuries such as gunshot wounds may have significant soft-tissue components that must be treated.
                                   The possibility of a coexisting compartment syndrome should be considered, and a fasciotomy may be needed at the
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   time of surgery. Open fractures are, by definition, contaminated and should be irrigated and debrided within 8 h of
                                   the injury. Surgical approaches depend on the nature and location of the fracture, but typically are longitudinal. Some
                                   fractures of the articular surface of the distal radius are amenable to percutaneous pin fixation using fluoroscopy and
                                   possibly arthroscopic assistance. Screw fixation of the scaphoid also can be accomplished via percutaneous methods
                                   using image guidance. This injury may be associated with a picture of perilunar instability. Damage to intercarpal
                                   ligaments may require open repair or reduction and percutaneous pinning. Intraoperative fluoroscopy often is uti-
                                   lized, as are standard portable radiographs to monitor and assess the quality of the reduction of the fracture.
                                   Soft-tissue coverage of these injuries may be problematic, and local flaps or free microvascular tissue transfers
                                   may be indicated. Rarely are these procedures done with the initial operative debridement; an antibiotic bead pouch
                                   or wound vac may be used to temporize open wounds. Free transfers can come from the same limb (radial forearm
                                   flap, based on the radial artery; lateral upper arm flap, based on the posterior radial collateral artery) or a remote site
                                   (latissimus dorsi muscle, based on the thoracodorsal artery; or scapular skin flap, based on the circumflex scapular
                                   artery). Remote flaps require special patient positioning and draping. Microsurgical tissue transfers also may need
                                   special pharmacological considerations, such as the administration of heparin or dextran to prevent thrombosis of
                                   the anastomosis. These procedures also significantly increase operative time and equipment needs.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fractures of the distal radius (Colles’, Barton’s, Smith’s are common eponyms); wrist
                                   dislocations (perilunate, lunate); fractures of the carpus, metacarpals, or phalanges; GSW; crush injuries; blast injuries

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                  Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                  Usually volar, longitudinal for distal radius; longitudinal either midaxial, midlateral or dorsal for
                                                              phalanges; dorsal for metacarpals and carpal fractures; a volar incision is used if symptoms of
                                                              acute carpal tunnel syndrome are present.

===== PAGE 951 =====
Fixation of Fractures and Dislocations of the Wrist and Hand      951

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont'd)
                     Special                Fluoroscopy; internal and external fixation devices and power tools; pneumatic tourniquet
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Associated injuries and soft-tissue problems in high-energy fractures
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Cephalosporin prophylaxis is indicated for the treatment of closed fractures. Open fractures
                                            may require the addition of an aminoglycoside or penicillin depending on the amount and type of
                                            contamination.

                     Surgical time          30 min–3 h

                     Tourniquet             150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                     Closing                Some injuries require local flaps or free microsurgical tissue transfers for closure. Fasciotomy
                       considerations       wounds may be left open. Splint applied at surgery.

                     EBL                    Minimal for fracture treatment, as tourniquet control is used.

                     Postop care            PACU → home unless significant soft-tissue injuries requiring additional procedures

                     Mortality              Usually 2° associated injuries

                     Morbidity              Loss of reduction, requiring repair
                                            Nonunion (requires additional surgical procedure)
                                            Infection

                     Pain score             3–9 (Great variation, probably depending on degree of median, ulnar, or dorsal radial sensory
                                            nerve involvement. Postop pain management is often problematic. Early use of stellate gan-
                                            glion blocks may be beneficial in preventing the development of sympathetic mediated pain
                                            syndromes.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All ages. More conservative approaches are used with elderly patients.

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Very common

                     Etiology               Trauma

                     Associated             Traumatic injuries
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The majority of patients presenting for these procedures are relatively young and healthy. Most present for elective
                   repair of a traumatic injury, and preop workup is routine. Replantation and some injuries, such as irreducible dislo-
                   cations or open fracture, require immediate attention and necessitate emergency surgery and full-stomach consid-
                   erations (see p. B-5).

                    Neurologic              If regional anesthesia is contemplated, preexisting sensory or motor defects should be
                                            documented carefully preop.

                    Laboratory              Hb/Hct (healthy patients); otherwise, as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100 mcg
                                            iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

===== PAGE 952 =====
952   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, regional anesthesia, or a combination is commonly used. A brachial plexus block is
                                   excellent for short (1–2 h) procedures on the wrist and hand. Ultrasound-guided block may be performed with a su-
                                   praclavicular or axillary approach. Using a nerve stimulator, infraclavicular or axillary approaches are usual. Regional
                                   anesthesia alone is a means of avoiding the risk of aspiration pneumonitis associated with GA in the patient with
                                   a full stomach whose operation must be done emergently (see Rapid-Sequence Induction of Anesthesia, p. B-5). A
                                   combination of regional and general anesthesia is appropriate for prolonged cases and those that require the use of
                                   bone grafts harvested from the iliac crest or a free-tissue transfer.

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                 Standard induction (p. B-2)

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                                   Emergence                 Skin closure is frequently followed by application of a splint; patient should remain anes-
                                                             thetized during splinting procedure.

                                   Regional anesthesia: 1.5% mepivacaine (40 mL) for routine superficial cases; 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropiva-
                                   caine, 40 mL for procedures > 2.5 h or if extended analgesia is desired. Epinephrine (2.5–5 mcg/mL) may be added to
                                   decrease peak plasma concentrations of local anesthetics.

                                   Ultrasound-               Ultrasound-guided brachial plexus using supraclavicular, infraclavicular, or axillary ap-
                                    guided brachial          proaches are all suitable for surgery below the shoulder. The infraclavicular approach is the
                                    plexus block             most effective for placement of peripheral nerve catheters. The supraclavicular approach
                                                             is associated with phrenic nerve blockade in 50% of patients and should be avoided in pa-
                                                             tients with respiratory compromise.

                                   Infraclavicular           The coracoid approach using nerve stimulation is a safe and effective regional technique
                                      block                  when ultrasound guidance is unavailable. A single injection will provide anesthesia dis-
                                                             tal to the midhumerus. No additional injections are necessary, and the patient’s arm does
                                                             not need to be abducted for block placement. If intraop sedation is necessary, propofol
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                             (50–100 mcg/kg/min) by continuous infusion or intermittent bolus injection of opioid/
                                                             benzodiazepine are good choices.

                                   Axillary block            Infrequently used for these procedures given the superiority of a brachial plexus block. To
                                                             provide similar coverage, an axillary block usually requires supplemental blocks for the
                                                             intercostobrachial nerve (T2) and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

                                   Blood and fluid           Minimal-to-moderate blood loss          An 18-ga iv catheter placed in the nonoperative
                                      requirements           IV: 18 ga × 1                           upper extremity should be adequate.
                                                             NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                                   Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                             ✓ eyes

                                   Infraclavicular           Local anesthetic toxicity               Rx severe toxicity with Intralipid® 20% 1.5 mL/kg iv
                                      block                  Inadequate block                        initially.
                                      complications          Intravascular injection
                                                             Pneumothorax                            Pneumothorax is very rare with the lateral coracoid
                                                             Persistent paresthesia                  approach.
                                                             Phrenic nerve block                     Usually asymptomatic. Incidence ≤ 50%

===== PAGE 953 =====
Digit and Hand Replantation         953

                    Axillary block            Inadequate block                           Minimal doses of local anesthetic can cause CNS
                      complications           Intravascular injection                    toxicity during an accidental intravascular injec-
                                              Persistent paresthesia                     tion. Sz should be treated with propofol or midazol-
                                              Axillary hematoma                          am titrated to effect, accompanied by airway con-
                                              Axillary artery thrombosis                 trol. If there is any question of a full stomach, then
                                                                                         intubation should be accomplished rapidly. Axillary
                                                                                         thrombosis is extremely rare.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain                      Continuous nerve block can be consid-            Regional or combined regional-general anes-
                      management              ered in appropriate cases. PCA (p. C-3),         thetic techniques are excellent for wrist pro-
                                              in combination with regional block               cedures, especially with respect to postop pain
                                                                                               management.

                    Tests                     None routinely indicated

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Draeger RW, Messer TM: Suprascapular nerve palsy following supraclavicular block for upper extremity surgery: report of
                        3 cases. J Hand Surg Am 2012; 37(12):2576–9.
                     2. Jones NF, Jupiter JB, Lalonde DH: Common fractures and dislocations of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 130(5):
                        722e–736e.
                     3. Madison SJ, Humsl J, Loland VJ, et al: Ultrasound-guided root/trunk (interscalene) block for hand and forearm anesthesia.
                        Reg Anesth Pain Med 2013; 38(3):226–32.
                     4. Sia S: Axillary brachial plexus block using peripheral nerve stimulator: a comparison between double- and triple-injection
                        techniques. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2001; 26(6):499–503.
                     5. Ustuner E, Yilmaz A, Özgencil E, Okten F, Turhan SC: Ultrasound anatomy of the brachial plexus nerves in the neurovascular
                        bundle at the axilla in patients undergoing upper-extremity block anesthesia. Skeletal Radiol 2013; 42(5):707–13.

                                                                                                                                                            Orthopedic Surgery
                   DIGIT AND HAND REPLANTATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Patients with traumatic amputations of digits and the hand are candidates for emergency microsur-
                   gical replantation of these parts. In children, replantation is attempted for essentially all amputations. In the adult,
                   replantation is carried out for amputations of the thumb, multiple digits, and amputations through the palm or
                   proximal. In general, amputations of a single digit are not candidates for replantation because of the minimal loss
                   of function in relation to the long rehabilitation period and expected outcome. Certainly, a single digit amputated
                   proximal to the insertion of the flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) tendon (Zone II; Fig. 10.1-3) should not be
                   replanted. The condition of the amputated part plays an important role in the decision to proceed with replanta-
                   tion. A severely crushed, contaminated, or burned part cannot be expected to survive and function. In addition
                   to the condition of the amputated part, the method of preservation and the time from initial injury play a role in
                   deciding on whether or not replantation is attempted. The patients also may have associated traumatic injuries
                   (i.e., intraabdominal bleeding with a positive peritoneal lavage, chest injuries), which will take precedence over
                   replantation. The patient’s overall health status must be assessed and may play a role in deciding whether or not
                   to proceed with replantation.
                   There are a variety of reasons that people suffer amputations. Some studies of these patients have shown an in-
                   creased incidence of psychopathology, such as alcohol or substance abuse. More often than not these injuries occur
                   in industrial accidents or in a population of people using power tools at home. Rarely children will gain access to
                   dangerous objects, and self-inflicted injuries can occur. Because these procedures are emergent, patients often arrive

===== PAGE 954 =====
954   c h a p t e r 10.1    Hand Surgery

                                   at the hospital with full stomachs. Although regional anesthesia techniques provide peripheral vasodilation through
                                   their sympatholytic effect, surgeons prefer GA because of the unpredictable length of the procedures. While the pa-
                                   tient is being readied for induction, the surgeon prepares the amputated part in the OR. At this time, the structures
                                   to be repaired are tagged, which saves a great deal of anesthetic time. When the patient is prepped and draped, the
                                   hand is irrigated and debrided, and the corresponding structures are tagged in similar manner. The amputated part
                                   is brought to the field, and the actual replantation is performed. Once arterial blood flow is reestablished, the patient
                                   must be kept warm to prevent vasospasm. As with other microsurgical procedures, pharmacologic intervention is
                                   indicated to prevent thrombosis; iv heparin and dextran are normally administered. Skin grafts for soft-tissue cover-
                                   age and vein grafts to replace segmental vascular defects are commonly used. Vein grafts can be obtained from the
                                   ipsilateral upper extremity or from the lower extremity, especially the dorsum of the foot. Either the lateral thigh or
                                   abdomen is an excellent donor site for split-thickness skin grafts. Rarely is an immediate microsurgical free-tissue
                                   transfer indicated for soft-tissue coverage.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Traumatic amputation of the digits or hand

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, with arm extended on hand-surgery table

                                    Incision                 Incisions extend both proximal and distal to traumatic amputation to explore neurovascular struc-
                                                             tures as well as define the zone of injury. Lower extremity prepped and draped as donor site for
                                                             vein grafts from dorsum of foot, split-thickness skin graft from the thigh.

                                    Special                  Operating microscope; microsurgical instrumentation
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Emergency procedure
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                    Surgical time            3–12 h

                                    Tourniquet               150 mm Hg above SBP; max time = 120 min

                                    Closing                  Routine volar hand splint
                                      considerations
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    EBL                      < 500 mL

                                    Postop care              ICU → requires monitoring in intensive nursing environment. Should be kept pain-free for extend-
                                                             ed period postop to minimize vessel spasm. Patients will benefit from postop sedation.

                                    Mortality                Minimal for digit and hand. Mortality becomes an important issue when large amounts of muscle
                                                             are part of the reattachment.

                                    Morbidity                Loss of replanted part (vessel thrombosis): 10%
                                                             Infection: Rare

                                    Pain score               3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                All ages, typically adults of working age

                                    Male:Female              1:1

                                    Incidence                Uncommon

                                    Etiology                 Trauma

                                    Associated               Substance abuse; alcoholism
                                      conditions

===== PAGE 955 =====
Digit and Hand Replantation       955

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   In general, there are two patient populations for hand replantation: (a) isolated hand injury patients (common), and
                   (b) multiple trauma victims (rare).

                    Respiratory             As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. Evidence of occult chest injury,
                                            including pneumothorax and pulmonary contusion, should be sought.
                                            Tests: Consider CXR, ABGs in victims of significant trauma.

                    Cardiovascular          As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. ✓ for evidence of occult car-
                                            diac or mediastinal injuries, such as myocardial contusion or great vessel rupture.
                                            Tests: Consider CXR (with NG tube in place to assess mediastinal widening) and ECG in
                                            victims of significant trauma.

                    Neurological            As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. The possibility of closed head
                                            injury should be addressed in multiple-trauma victims. Verify integrity of C-spine.
                                            Tests: Consider head CT prior to beginning a long procedure under GA in a patient with
                                            evidence of head trauma; C-spine x-ray.

                    Gastrointestinal        All patients should be considered to have a full stomach and to be at risk for aspiration
                                            pneumonitis. In general, they should receive preop medication to reduce stomach volume
                                            and acidity (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg iv and ranitidine 50 mg iv).

                    Hematologic             Multiple-trauma victims are likely to suffer from acute blood loss. Although blood loss
                                            from these procedures is generally modest, a preop T&C for several U PRBCs is wise for
                                            trauma patients.
                                            Tests: CBC

                    Metabolic               ~50% of trauma victims are intoxicated. Anesthesia-related implications of ethanol
                                            intoxication include decreased anesthetic requirements, diuresis, vasodilation, and
                                            hypothermia.

                    Laboratory              As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. In general, most victims of sig-
                                            nificant trauma are best served by obtaining a wide variety of baseline lab studies to screen

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                                            for unrecognized injury. These studies normally include ABGs, UA, renal function tests,
                                            LFTs, serum amylase, tox screen.

                    Premedication           Full-stomach precautions: Na citrate 0.3 M 30 mL, metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv; H2-blocker

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, after rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5). Because of the unpredictable length of
                   these procedures and the possible need for bone and/or vessel grafts, regional anesthesia is not feasible as the pri-
                   mary technique. A concurrent, continuing brachial plexus block, however, will provide sympathetic blockade, as well
                   as postop analgesia, and catheter placement should be considered before inducing GA. The hand injury repair may
                   be done concurrently with other procedures in multiple-trauma victims.

                    Induction               Rapid-sequence induction (p. B-5) is mandatory in emergency cases, unless awake intu-
                                            bation is performed. C-spine fracture patients and those with facial injuries may require
                                            awake fiberoptic intubation (p. B-6). Hemodynamically unstable, acute-trauma patients
                                            may be induced more safely with etomidate or ketamine.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3) for stable patients. Hemodynamically unstable, acute-trauma
                                            victims undergoing emergency surgery may be better served by using a combination of
                                            medications designed to have minimal hemodynamic consequences (e.g., fentanyl for an-
                                            algesia, vecuronium for muscle relaxation, and scopolamine or midazolam for amnesia).
                                            N2O is best avoided in the trauma patient.

===== PAGE 956 =====
956   c h a p t e r 10.1      Hand Surgery

                                   Emergence                    Difficult airway or full-stomach cases require awake extubation. Trauma victims who have
                                                                undergone a prolonged procedure or who have significant associated cardiopulmonary in-
                                                                juries should remain intubated for postop mechanical ventilation.

                                   Blood and fluid              Significant blood loss                      A 16-ga iv catheter in nonoperative upper extrem-
                                     requirements               IV: 16 ga × 1                               ity should be adequate in hemodynamically stable
                                                                NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h + replace-            patients. Acute-trauma victims who are unstable
                                                                ment of blood loss                          require a minimum of two large-bore iv catheters
                                                                Fluid/blood warmers, heating blan-          or large-bore central lines.
                                                                ket, warmed circuit humidifier

                                   Monitoring                   Standard monitors (p. B-1)                  Invasive hemodynamic monitoring and TEE should
                                                                                                            be considered in acute, multiple-trauma victims.

                                   Positioning                  ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                                ✓ eyes

                                   Complications                Hemodynamic instability                     Previously unrecognized injuries (e.g., pneumo-
                                                                                                            thorax, cardiac tamponade, intracranial bleeding)
                                                                                                            should be considered as a cause of unexplained in-
                                                                                                            traop hemodynamic instability in all acute-trauma
                                                                                                            victims.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications                Sepsis
                                                                ARDS

                                   Pain                         PCA (p. C-3)
                                     management

                                   Tests                        None routinely indicated
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Hartzell TL, Benhaim P, Imbriglia JE, et al: Surgical and technical aspects of hand transplantation: is it just another replant?
                                        Hand Clin 2011; 27(4):521–30.
                                     2. Maricevich M, Carlsen B, Mardini S, Moran S: Upper extremity and digital replantation. Hand (NY) 2011; 6(4):356–63.
                                     3. Morrison WA, McCombe D: Digital replantation. Hand Clin 2007; 23(1):1–12.
                                     4. Scheker LR, Becker, GW: Distal finger replantation. J Hand Surg Am 2011; 36(3):521–8.

                                   Suggested Viewing
                                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                                   Hand Ganglion Cyst Excision (Dorsal) with Bier Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_7ihlyW7LxQ
                                   Wrist Arthroscopy Surgery: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wg1GwRBMiZ4
                                   Carpal Tunnel Surgery: Inside the Operating Room: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JdHrRf7JinA
                                   Trigger Finger Surgery: Inside the Operating Room: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DISCFr0YeiM
                                   Dupuytren’s Contracture Release: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yjYRlo_Zupw

===== PAGE 957 =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.2 Shoulder/Arm
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Amy L. Ladd, MD
                                           Andrew C. Karich, MD
                                           Emilie V. Cheung, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Lindsey Vokach-Brodsky, MB, ChB, FFARCSI

===== PAGE 958 =====
ARTHROSCOPIC SHOULDER SURGERY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The role of arthroscopy in shoulder surgery has advanced tremendously in the past decade and is now
                                   routinely performed by most shoulder surgeons. Arthroscopic procedures include subacromial decompression
                                   (SAD), distal clavicle resection (Mumford procedure), debridement (for labral tear, infection, or synovitis), rota-
                                   tor cuff (RC) repair, anterior capsule-labral repair for recurrent dislocation (Bankart repair), capsular plication
                                   for multidirectional instability (MDI), capsular release for frozen shoulder, and repair of SLAP lesions (superior
                                   labral anterior-posterior tears).
                                   Procedures done arthroscopically are less painful postoperatively than open procedures because they produce less trau-
                                   ma to normal tissues. Rehabilitation is, therefore, facilitated. Interscalene block has been shown to provide good postop
                                   analgesia of shorter duration, but its clinical application with arthroscopic procedures is surgeon-dependent because
                                   the postoperative pain is usually moderate to mild. Some surgeons prefer only a general anesthesia for shoulder arthros-
                                   copy. The use of indwelling intra-articular pain catheters has fallen out of favor in the past few years due to multiple case
                                   reports of chondrolysis, a devastating complication characterized by end-stage arthrosis of the glenohumeral joint.
                                   Arthroscopic shoulder surgery may be performed in the beachchair or lateral decubitus position. Beachchair
                                   positioners are available with a trough for the head and a breakaway shoulder pad to provide important access to the
                                   posterior shoulder. The lateral decubitus position utilizes distal traction of 5–10 lbs, with the arm abducted 30–45°.
                                   Both are safe positions for the brachial plexus because the shoulder is not excessively abducted. The “down” arm in
                                   the lateral position is placed in forward flexion, and an axillary roll is placed underneath the upper chest wall.
                                   Initially, an 18-ga spinal needle is inserted into the glenohumeral joint, passing through the posterior deltoid and
                                   infraspinatus muscle and the posterior capsule of the joint (see shoulder anatomy, Fig. 10.2-1). Placement is verified
                                   by injecting saline to inflate the joint capsule. A stab incision is made using a No. 11 blade in the direction previously
                                   defined by the finder needle. Sharp, then blunt trocars are used to gain access to the joint and permit insertion of
                                   the arthroscopic device. Improper insertion of the instruments can injure the axillary or suprascapular nerves and
                                   the cartilage of the glenohumeral joint. Initial diagnostic arthroscopy is carried out through the posterior portal.
                                   Bupivacaine 0.5% with epinephrine 1:200,000 often is infiltrated into portals and the joint or subacromial space at
                                   the onset of surgery to help with hemostasis. An anterior portal is used for instrumentation within the glenohumeral
                                   joint. After joint arthroscopy, the scope is placed into the subacromial space, where a direct lateral portal is used for
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   instrumentation. Accessory portals are established as needed, depending on the procedure performed. Joint debride-
                                   ment and anterior capsulolabral stabilization are usually performed through anterior portals. RC repair, subacromial
                                   bursectomy, acromioplasty, and distal clavicle resection are done within the subacromial space (deep to the deltoid
                                   and superficial to the RC). Epinephrine (1 mg/3 L) in the irrigation fluid and maintaining MAP < 80 mm Hg help
                                   control bleeding, thus enhancing visualization during surgery.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Rotator cuff tear; subacromial impingement; glenohumeral instability; AC arthritis; labral tear

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Lateral decubitus or beachchair

                                    Incision                 Posterior arthroscopic portal, anterior instrumentation portal, lateral instrumentation portal for
                                                             visualizing subacromial bursa; superior portal for semisitting position

                                    Special                  Arthroscope; power burrs; arthroscopic shavers; suture-passing instruments; bone anchors;
                                      instrumentation        radiofrequency cautery

                                    Unique                   Rigid eye patch over ipsilateral eye, to prevent corneal abrasion, suggested. Positioning of the
                                      considerations         head with appropriate support, removing upper section of operating table, if possible, for better
                                                             access with semisitting position. ETT taped to opposite side of face. MAP ≤ 80.

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv preop, particularly if bone work performed

                                    Surgical time            Positioning the patient is time-intensive; can add as much as 45 min.
                                                             Reconstructive: 1–4 h
                                                             Diagnostic: < 1–1.5 h

                             958

===== PAGE 959 =====
arthroscopic shoulder surgery         959

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     EBL                   Minimal: < 200 mL (less with use of epinephrine, electrocautery, and laser)

                     Postop care           Frequently outpatient; may be overnight if interscalene or supraclavicular block is given or recon-
                                           structive procedure performed. Intraarticular pain catheter commonly used.

                     Mortality             Rare

                     Morbidity             VAE possible
                                           Extravasation of fluid (NS or LR): > 50%
                                           Brachial plexus injury (lateral decubitus position): Rare
                                           Breakage of instruments: < 1%
                                           Infection: 0–3%

                     Pain score            4 (diagnostic); 5–7 (reconstruction)

                                                                                                                                                        Orthopedic Surgery

                               Figure 10.2-1. Anatomy of the shoulder joint, anterior. (Reproduced with permission
                               from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic
                               Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1994.)

===== PAGE 960 =====
960   c h a p t e r 10.2     Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                 15–40 yr (instability); 35–75 yr (rotator cuff and acromial pathology)

                                    Male:Female               2:1–4:1

                                    Incidence                 Very common: > 50,000/yr

                                    Etiology                  Young patients: usually sports-related
                                                              Older patients: cuff and acromial pathology; age-wear phenomenon
                                                              Rotator cuff pathology and acromial impingement (frequently coexist)

                                    Associated                Cervical arthritis and radiculopathy with rotator cuff pathology
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Surgery for Shoulder Instability, p. 966.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Baechler MF, Kim DH: Patient positioning for shoulder arthroscopy based on variability in lateral acromion morphology.
                                        Arthroscopy 2002; 18(5):547–9.
                                     2. Bigliani LU, Flatow EL, Deliz ED: Complications of shoulder arthroscopy. Orthop Rev 1991; 20(9):743–51.
                                     3. Dattani R, Smith CD, Patel VR: The venous thromboembolic complications of shoulder and elbow surgery: a systematic
                                        review. Bone Joint J 2013; 95-B(1):70–4.
                                     4. Pearsall AW IV, Osbahr DC, Speer KP: An arthroscopic technique for treating patients with frozen shoulder. Arthroscopy
                                        1999; 15(1):2–11.
                                     5. Ruotolo C, Nottage WM, Flatow EL, et al: Controversial topics in shoulder arthroscopy. Arthroscopy 2002; 18(2 Suppl 1):65–75.
                                     6. Salazar D, Sears BW, Andre J, Tonion P, Marra G: Cerebral desaturation during shoulder arthroscopy: a prospective
                                        observational study. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2013; 471(12):4027–34.

                                   SURGERY FOR ACROMIAL IMPINGEMENT, ROTATOR
                                   CUFF TEARS, AND ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   ARTHRITIS
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Subacromial impingement is a common degenerative condition of middle age. It may be related
                                   to extrinsic anatomic factors (e.g., hooked acromion), a traumatic episode, or intrinsic factors (e.g., tissue degen-
                                   eration). The subacromial space (space between the acromion and humeral head) is occupied by the supraspinatus
                                   (superior rotator cuff [RC]) muscle and tendon and the bursa, which allows for smooth gliding of the cuff tendon
                                   under the acromion. Trauma produces hemorrhage and inflammation in the bursa; swelling of the bursa decreases
                                   the space available under the acromion. These tissues may then be “pinched” between the greater tuberosity of the
                                   humerus and the lateral aspect of the acromion (Fig. 10.2-2) with forward elevation or abduction of the arm. This
                                   further increases the inflammation, producing a vicious cycle.
                                   Impingement of the anterolateral acromion on the insertion of the supraspinatus (along with poor vascularity of this
                                   part of the cuff ) is a leading hypothesis for the etiology of degenerative RC tears.
                                   AC joint arthritis is a common radiographic finding in adults, but it is often asymptomatic. Distal clavicle excision
                                   is performed for clinically symptomatic AC joint arthritis.
                                   Subacromial impingement: Surgical treatment of subacromial impingement is indicated when nonoperative
                                   treatment (e.g., cortisone injection, physical therapy) fails. Surgery involves shaving of the anterolateral aspect of the
                                   undersurface of the acromion (creating a flat surface and providing more room in the subacromial space). This may be
                                   accomplished with open techniques in combination with open RC repair, but it is more commonly done arthroscopi-
                                   cally. The bursa is usually inflamed and quite vascular. Bleeding may obscure arthroscopic visualization and is con-
                                   trolled with electrocautery, with epinephrine in the irrigant, and by maintaining relative ↓ BP (MAP < 80 mm Hg).

===== PAGE 961 =====
surgery for acromial impingement, rotator cuff tears, and acromioclavicular joint arthritis                 961

                               Figure 10.2-2. Abduction of the arm can impinge the subacromial bursa between the
                               greater tuberosity and the undersurface of the acromion and coracoacromial ligament
                               (between arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical
                               Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams
                               & Wilkins: 1994.)

                   Rotator cuff tears: RC (Fig. 10.2-3) repair may be performed using the direct lateral open approach, the mini-
                   open (deltoid-splitting) approach in conjunction with arthroscopy, or all arthroscopically. If a deltoid-splitting
                   incision is used, care is taken not to extend the split more than 5 cm distal to the acromion because of possible in-
                   jury to the axillary nerve, which innervates the deltoid 5 cm or more from the lateral aspect of the acromion. If the
                   beachchair position is used for open RC surgery or arthroscopy, the upper limb is draped free. The arm is manipu-
                    lated, and traction is frequently applied. It is important that the head is secured (the head may be taped to the table

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                    or special beachchair positioner), the eyes are protected, and the anesthesiologist frequently checks to see that the
                    surgeon is not pulling the patient off the table (not always apparent from the surgeon’s side of the drape). Traction on
                    the brachial plexus is more likely in the lateral decubitus position 2° arm traction.
                   Open RC repair involves suturing the cuff insertion back to the greater tuberosity through drill holes or with suture
                   anchors. Arthroscopic repair requires percutaneous anchor placement and arthroscopic suture-passing and knot-
                   tying. Bleeding is minimal with the arthroscopic technique, but may approach 400 mL with an open procedure. Both
                   require that the patient remain relaxed until all dressings are applied and he/she is fitted with an abduction sling.
                   Patients typically are admitted for 24 h for pain control or if a drain is used.
                   AC joint disease: Surgery for AC joint arthritis is usually performed in conjunction with SAD and/or RC repair
                   and may be done open or arthroscopically. It involves simple resection of the distal 5 mm of the clavicle through
                   an incision directly over the joint or through an accessory anterior portal. Again, relative ↓ BP is required for the
                   arthroscopic procedure.
                   Repair of AC joint dislocation (“shoulder separation”) is uncommon. Most AC separations are treated
                   nonoperatively because long-term functional results are the same or better than those treated surgically. Severe AC
                    separations occasionally require surgery, when the dislocated clavicle is buttonholed posteriorly through the trape-
                    zius, the deltoid origin has been avulsed from the clavicle, or the clavicle is displaced inferiorly below the cricoid pro-
                    cess. Repair is performed in the beachchair position with the incision carried out over the AC joint and distal third
                    of the clavicle. The clavicle is reduced and held in place with a large screw into the base of the coracoid, a large suture
                    wrapped around the coracoid, or with K-wires across the AC joint. The coracoclavicular ligament often is repaired
                    or reconstructed with tendon graft, or the coracoacromial ligament is transferred from the edge of the acromion to
                    the clavicle. Following reduction and fixation, the deltoid is reattached to the clavicle if it has been avulsed, and the
                    patient is placed in an immobilizer after skin closure. The operation is technically challenging, and the brachial
                    plexus and subclavian vessels are at risk with screw placement and with inferior dislocations.

===== PAGE 962 =====
962   c h a p t e r 10.2    Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                                              A
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                              B

                                               Figure 10.2-3. Lateral view of the right shoulder showing a rotator cuff repair.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Lafosse L, Brozska R, Toussaint B, et al: The outcome
                                               and structural integrity of arthroscopic rotator cuff repair with use of the double-row
                                               suture anchor technique. J Bone Joint Surg 2007; 89(7):1533–41.) A: Rotator cuff tear.
                                               B: Rotator cuff repair with suture anchors.

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: RC tears (partial or complete); AC arthritis; impingement; bursitis; bicipital tendinitis; AC
                                   separation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Beachchair; semisitting, ~40–70°; or lateral decubitus

                                    Incision                Oblique, saber-type incision anteriorly over distal acromion; lateral or deltopectoral incision for
                                                            wider exposure; deltoid-splitting incision for RC tears

===== PAGE 963 =====
surgery for acromial impingement, rotator cuff tears, and acromioclavicular joint arthritis                         963

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                   Power equipment for bone work; self-retaining retractors for cuff repairs; suture anchors
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                    Rigid eye protection for ipsilateral eye and careful head positioning
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                     Surgical time             1–3 h

                     Closing                   Muscle relaxation when mobilizing cuff and during closure. Arm in sling and swathe, or abduction
                       considerations          pillow for large tears. Immobilizer should be positioned prior to awakening patient to minimize
                                               potential for rupture of repair.

                     EBL                       200–400 mL

                     Postop care               Maintenance of position in sling and swathe; no active motion of shoulder girdle for 2 d–6 wk,
                                               depending on procedure.

                     Mortality                 Rare

                     Morbidity                 Infection: 1–5%
                                               Axillary nerve damage: < 2%
                                               Musculocutaneous nerve damage: < 2%
                                               Breakage of instruments: < 1%
                                               Brachial plexus damage (position-dependent)
                                               Suprascapular nerve at risk for RC mobilization

                     Pain score                5–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 Rotator cuff tears > 40 yr (younger for athletes)

                     Male:Female               3:1

                                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                                 2
                     Incidence                 5–30% of general population affected by RC and acromial conditions, depending on age, thick-
                                               ness of tear, associated conditions

                     Etiology                  Age-related; trauma (70% involved in light work)

                     Associated                Bursitis; tendinitis; impingement; RC disease (especially in first-time glenohumeral dislocations >
                       conditions              40 yr); diabetes and renal failure; hypermobility

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Surgery for Shoulder Instability, p. 966.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Chelly JE, Greger J, Al-Samsam T, et al: Reduction of operating and recovery room times and overnight hospital stay with
                        interscalene blocks as sole anesthetic technique for rotator cuff surgery. Minerva Anestesiol 2001; 67(9):613–9.
                     2. Cofield RH, Parvizi J, Hoffmeyer PJ, et al: Surgical repair of chronic rotator cuff tears. A prospective long-term study. J Bone
                        Joint Surg Am 2001; 83A(1):71–7.
                     3. Hata Y, Saitoh S, Murakami N, et al: A less invasive surgery for rotator cuff tear: mini-open repair. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2001;
                        10(1):11–16.
                     4. Martin SD, Baumgarten TE, Andrews JR: Arthroscopic resection of the distal aspect of the clavicle with concomitant
                        subacromial decompression. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2001; 83A(3):328–35.
                     5. Yamaguchi K, Ball CM, Galatz LM: Arthroscopic rotator cuff repair: transition from mini-open to all-arthroscopic. Clin
                        Orthop 2001; 390:83–94.

===== PAGE 964 =====
964   c h a p t e r 10.2    Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                   SURGERY FOR SHOULDER INSTABILITY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Shoulder instability is classified as multidirectional (MDI)/atraumatic, or unidirectional/traumatic.
                                   MDI is associated with generalized ligamentous laxity (e.g., Ehlers Danlos or Marfan syndromes, or idiopathic),
                                   and is treated primarily nonoperatively with physical therapy. Open or arthroscopic capsular shift is performed
                                   for recalcitrant cases. This involves “plication” of the capsule and/or labrum to decrease the capsular volume of the
                                   shoulder. Patients with MDI, known as “voluntary dislocators,” frequently have psychiatric disorders and are very
                                   poor candidates for surgery.
                                   Traumatic instability is usually anterior and is quite common in the young, active population. The shoulder is the
                                   most commonly dislocated joint. Recurrent dislocation in young, active patients is common (80–90%) and is associ-
                                   ated with avulsion of the capsule/labrum from the anterior-inferior glenoid rim (Bankart lesion). The population
                                   undergoing a Bankart repair is almost invariably young and healthy. Older first-time dislocators (age > 50 yr) more
                                   commonly sustain rotator cuff (RC) tears or fractures, which do not result in chronic instability, but may require
                                   operative reduction and RC repair or fracture fixation. Posterior traumatic dislocation is much less common and is
                                   associated with high-energy trauma, seizures, or electrocution.
                                   Instability surgery is often preceded by exam under anesthesia and arthroscopic examination, either in the
                                   beachchair or lateral decubitus position. The essential feature of instability surgery, whether arthroscopic or open,
                                    is the reattachment of the anterior inferior capsulolabral complex back to the rim of the glenoid, thus reestablishing
                                    the normal “bumper” effect of the anterior-inferior labrum and decreasing the capsular volume of the shoulder.
                                    Nonanatomic procedures (reconstructive) are much less common, but are still performed occasionally. These include
                                     transfer of the coracoid process to the anterior glenoid rim (Bristow or Latarjet procedure).
                                   The open Bankart repair is performed in the beachchair position using the deltopectoral approach, with the interval
                                   between the deltoid and pectoralis major. The subscapularis (anterior RC muscle) lies just anterior to the joint cap-
                                   sule (Fig. 10.2-4), and this is either detached from its insertion or split. The capsule may then be opened to visualize
                                   the joint and rim of the glenoid. The glenoid rim is decorticated, providing bleeding bone to promote healing, and
                                   the anterior capsule is reattached through drill holes in the glenoid or with suture anchors. The capsule often is im-
                                   bricated (overlapping folds) if it is redundant.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   The shoulder and deltoid are highly vascular; however, bleeding is usually slight, with careful surgical technique.
                                   Major nerves are close but out of the plane of the operative field. The musculocutaneous nerve may be stretched by
                                   excessive medial retraction of the coracobrachialis (especially if a coracoid osteotomy is used) and the axillary nerve
                                   may be injured if the surgeon strays too far inferiorly.
                                   If a subscapularis-releasing technique is used, the muscle is reattached and must be protected postop. External
                                   rotation of the shoulder is prevented for several weeks while the repair heals, and the surgeon prefers that the patient
                                   remain anesthetized until a shoulder immobilizer is applied.
                                   The arthroscopic Bankart repair is similar to the open procedure but is performed through two anterior portals
                                   with the scope coming in posteriorly. This procedure is less painful postop and allows for more rapid rehabilitation,
                                   because the subscapularis is not detached.
                                   Open surgery for posterior dislocation is similar to the open Bankart repair, but it is done in the lateral position
                                   and utilizes the interval between the infraspinatus and teres minor. The RC attachment is preserved, but the posterior
                                   deltoid is detached and must be protected postop.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Recurrent traumatic anterior or posterior instability; MDI; fracture dislocation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                 Open                                               Arthroscopic

                                    Position                     Beachchair for anterior; lateral decubitus for     Lateral decubitus or beachchair
                                                                 posterior

                                    Incision                     Deltopectoral (anterior); posterior approach       Multiple small portals
                                                                 (posterior)

===== PAGE 965 =====
surgery for shoulder instability   965

                               Figure 10.2-4. Cross section of the joint: The joint capsule is redundant inferiorly
                               to allow abduction. The long head of the biceps tendon traverses the joint. The
                               tendon is surrounded by synovium and, therefore, is anatomically intracapsular but
                               extrasynovial. (Reproduced with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical

                                                                                                                                                Orthopedic Surgery
                               Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                               Wilkins: 1994.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                               Open                                               Arthroscopic

                     Special instrumentation   Arthroscopic shaver; suture anchors; glenoid and   ⇐ + arthroscopic instruments for
                                               humeral instrumentation                            suture passing and knot-tying

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv preop if bone work performed      ⇐

                     Surgical time             2–4 h                                              ⇐

                     Closing considerations    Continuous anesthesia until application of sling   ⇐
                                               and swathe or abduction pillow

                     EBL                       200–400 mL                                         Minimal

                     Postop care               No active motion for 6 wk                          ⇐

                     Mortality                 Minimal                                            ⇐

                     Morbidity                 Axillary nerve palsy: 15% (may be preexisting)
                                               Suprascapular nerve injury

                     Pain score                8                                                  5

===== PAGE 966 =====
966   c h a p t e r 10.2   Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              15–35 yr

                                    Male:Female            2:1

                                    Incidence              Common

                                    Etiology               Trauma; hypermobility; Sz

                                    Associated             RC tears (> 50 yr); hypermobility syndrome; Sz disorder; Hill-Sachs lesion (humeral head defect)
                                      conditions           may require bone grafting; superior labral tears; in most axillary nerve palsies from the injury;
                                                           iatrogenic (rare)

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   (Procedures covered: shoulder arthroscopy; surgery for acromial impingement, RC tears, and AC disease;
                                   surgery for shoulder dislocations or instability)

                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Typically, three patient populations present for repair of RC tears or shoulder arthroscopy: (a) healthy posttrauma,
                                   (b) nonrheumatoid arthritic, and (c) rheumatoid arthritic. Individuals presenting for repair of shoulder disloca-
                                   tions also may include those with a joint hypermobility syndrome (e.g., Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos) or Sz disorder
                                   patients.

                                   Respiratory              Arthritic patients may exhibit Sx of pleural effusion or pulmonary fibrosis. Hoarseness may
                                                            indicate cricoarytenoid joint (CAJ) involvement → difficult intubation. (See Anesthetic
                                                            Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.) Seizure disorder patients who suffer from
                                                            recurrent shoulder dislocation as a result of frequent grand mal Sz also may suffer from
                                                            occult aspiration pneumonia or pneumonitis.
                                                            Tests: Consider CXR; PFTs; ABGs in debilitated rheumatoid patients.

                                   Cardiovascular           Arthritic patients may suffer from chronic pericardial effusions, valvular disease, and car-
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                            diac conduction defects. Patients presenting for shoulder stabilization because of joint
                                                            hypermobility syndromes are likely to have valvular dysfunction and are vulnerable to
                                                            aortic dissection 2° HTN. These patients may require antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial
                                                            endocarditis.
                                                            Tests: Consider ECG, ECHO in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis. Recent ECHO
                                                            to assess valve function and aortic root size indicated in most patients with Marfan
                                                            syndrome.

                                   Neurological             Arthritic patients may have cervical or lumbar radiculopathies that should be docu-
                                                            mented carefully preop. For example, head flexion may cause cervical cord compres-
                                                            sion. Patients with severe Sz disorders can suffer from recurrent shoulder dislocations
                                                            2° frequent violent grand mal Sz. Such patients should be treated maximally for Sz
                                                            disorder prior to elective surgery. Be aware that as many as 15% of shoulder dislocations
                                                            can be accompanied by axillary nerve palsy, which should be documented carefully
                                                            preop.
                                                            Tests: Consider C-spine radiographs to r/o occult subluxations in arthritic patients with
                                                            neck complaints or upper extremity radiculopathy. Verify therapeutic levels of antiepileptic
                                                            medication in Sz disorder patients.

                                   Musculoskeletal          Arthritic patients may have limited neck and jaw ROM and may require fiberoptic intuba-
                                                            tion techniques. Bony deformities or muscle contractures may necessitate special attention
                                                            to positioning. Patients with joint hypermobility syndromes presenting for shoulder sur-
                                                            gery also may suffer other joint dislocations 2° positioning problems.

===== PAGE 967 =====
surgery for shoulder instability      967

                    Hematologic             Virtually all patients will be on some type of anti-inflammatory medication that may result
                                            in anemia or Plt inhibition. Ideally, patients should D/C NSAIDs at least 5 d preop; aspirin,
                                            7 d. In addition, selected patients with Ehlers-Danlos are known to have severe coagulation
                                            defects that may preclude the use of regional anesthesia.
                                            Tests: A coag profile is mandatory in Ehlers-Danlos patients.

                    Endocrine               Rheumatoid patients may be on oral corticosteroids and may require supplemental periop-
                                            erative steroids (e.g., 100 mg hydrocortisone q 8 h iv) to treat adrenal suppression, although
                                            the routine use of “stress-dose steroids” has been questioned.

                    Laboratory              Hb/Hct (in healthy patients); other tests as indicated from H&P. Patients with Ehlers-
                                            Danlos syndrome should always have banked blood available for surgery, except for the
                                            most trivial of procedures.

                    Premedication           Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100
                                            mcg iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or regional anesthesia (interscalene block), or a combination of the two techniques,
                   can be used. A suprascapular block (when interscalene block is contraindicated) can be used for intraop → postop
                   pain control in arthroscopic shoulder procedures. When logistically feasible, a combined technique is ideal. Unless
                   contraindicated, a long-acting local anesthetic should be used in regional anesthesia for shoulder surgery to amelio-
                   rate postop pain.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2). Arthritic patients may require awake fiberoptic intubation
                                            (see p. B-6).

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3)

                    Emergence               Management of emergence and extubation should be routine, except in difficult airway
                                            cases, which require awake extubation. Patients should remain anesthetized until the
                                            shoulder is immobilized.

                                                                                                                                                    Orthopedic Surgery
                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Local                    2% lidocaine or 1.5% mepivacaine have similar onset times (10–15 min) and similar dura-
                      anesthetics            tion (4–6 h). If extended postop pain control is desired, 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropiva-
                                             caine (each with epinephrine 1:400,000) can be used. Onset is usually within 30 min, with
                                             duration up to 10–12 h. Ropivacaine may be preferred for peripheral nerve block due to its
                                             decreased cardiotoxicity.

                    Interscalene             0.5% bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, or ropivacaine 20–30 mL
                       block                 The skin on the top of the shoulder (C3-C4) and the medial aspect of the upper arm
                                             (T2) may require separate subcutaneous field blocks. Phrenic nerve block → hemi-
                                             diaphragmatic paralysis is an inevitable consequence of the interscalene block, which
                                             may not be tolerated by patients with significant preexisting respiratory compromise.
                                             Major complications, such as total spinal or pneumothorax resulting from interscalene
                                             block, are extremely rare. Interscalene block is contraindicated in patients with contra-
                                             lateral recurrent laryngeal nerve or phrenic nerve palsy (e.g., post CABG). If sedation is
                                             needed, midazolam (0.5–1.0 mcg boluses) or propofol (50–100 mg/kg/min by infusion),
                                             given initially in subanesthetic doses and thereafter titrated to effect, are good choices.

                    Blood and fluid          Minimal-to-moderate             IV catheter placed in contralateral upper extremity.
                       requirements          blood loss
                                             IV: 18 ga × 1
                                             NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h

===== PAGE 968 =====
968   c h a p t e r 10.2      Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                   Monitoring                   Standard monitors (see               BP cuff should be placed on the arm for beachchair
                                                                p. B-1).                             procedures. To help detect VAE, consider precordial
                                                                ± Precordial Doppler                 Doppler monitoring when semisitting position used.
                                                                ± Arterial line                      Consider intraarterial BP monitoring for patients with
                                                                                                     hypermobility disorders because of risk for aortic dissec-
                                                                                                     tion 2° HTN.

                                   Positioning                  ✓ and pad pressure points            Postural ↓ BP is the most common complication of the
                                                                ✓eyes                                semisitting position. Changing to this position gradu-
                                                                ↑ VAE risk in semisitting            ally can help prevent ↓ BP, as can the use of antiembo-
                                                                position                             lism stockings, plus fluid-loading the patient. Marfan and
                                                                                                     Ehlers-Danlos patients require very gentle positioning to
                                                                                                     prevent joint dislocations.

                                   Interscalene                 Total spinal                         Resuscitative equipment, including airway management
                                      block                     Accidental epidural                  tools, should be immediately available. When possible,
                                      complications               injection                          nerve blocks should be performed in responsive and co-
                                                                Local anesthetic toxicity            operative patients to minimize complications.
                                                                  (Sz/dysrhythmias)
                                                                Stellate ganglion block
                                                                  (Horner’s syndrome)
                                                                Laryngeal nerve block
                                                                Phrenic nerve block
                                                                Pneumothorax
                                                                Persistent paresthesia               May last ≤ 6 wk

                                   Other                        ↓ BP during surgical prep            ↓ BP during long surgical preps normally can be avoided
                                     complications              and positioning                      by using light inhalation anesthesia (e.g., isoflurane 0.3–
                                                                                                     0.5%) to ensure amnesia, with moderate muscle relaxation
                                                                                                     to prevent bucking on the ETT, and maintaining adequate
                                                                                                     hydration. Antiembolism stockings will help prevent ve-
                                                                                                     nous pooling in lower limbs.
                                                                Cardiac dysrhythmia                  Dysrhythmias may be 2° to irrigation fluids containing
                                                                VAE                                  epinephrine.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE
                                   Pain                         PCA (see p. C-3) or regional block          Combined regional-general anesthetic techniques
                                     management                 techniques.                                 are excellent for shoulder procedures, especially
                                                                                                            with respect to postop pain management.
                                   Tests                        None indicated routinely

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Borgeat A: Acute and nonacute complications associated with interscalene block and shoulder surgery. Anesthesiology 2001;
                                        95(4):875–80.
                                     2. Bottoni CR, Wilckens JH, DeBerardino TM, et al: A prospective, randomized evaluation of arthroscopic stabilization vs
                                        nonoperative treatment in patients with acute, traumatic, first-time shoulder dislocations. Am J Sports Med 2002; 30(4):576–80.
                                     3. Gill TJ, Micheli LJ, Gebhard F, et al: Bankart repair for anterior instability of the shoulder. Long-term outcome. J Bone Joint
                                        Surg Am 1997; 79(6):850–7.
                                     4. Kim SH, Ha KI, Kim SH: Bankart repair in traumatic anterior shoulder instability: open vs arthroscopic technique. Arthroscopy
                                        2002; 18(7):755–63.
                                     5. Murphy DB: Upper extremity blocks for day surgery. Tech in Reg Anes Pain Manag 2000; 4(1):19–29.
                                     6. Reginster JY, Damas P, Franchimont P: Anaesthetic risks in osteoarticular disorders. Clin Rheum 1985; 4(1):30–8.
                                     7. Sperber A, Hamberg P, Karlsson J, et al: Comparison of an arthroscopic and open procedure for posttraumatic instability of
                                        the shoulder: a prospective, randomized multicenter study. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2001; 10(2):105–8.
                                     8. Weiss KS, Savoie FH III: Recent advances in arthroscopic repair of traumatic anterior instability. Clin Orthop 2002; 400:117–22.

===== PAGE 969 =====
glenohumeral shoulder arthroplasty          969

                   GLENOHUMERAL SHOULDER ARTHROPLASTY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Shoulder replacement is performed for pain associated with end-stage arthritis. Primary osteoarthritis
                   (wear-and-tear arthritis) is much less common in the shoulder than in the weight-bearing joints, such as the hip and
                   knee. The most common causes of shoulder arthritis requiring total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) are osteoarthri-
                   tis, rheumatoid arthritis; avascular necrosis (AVN); posttraumatic arthritis, and rotator cuff tear arthropathy. Most
                   patients are older than 65 yr.
                   TSA involves replacement of the humeral head with a stemmed prosthesis and resurfacing the glenoid with a poly-
                   ethylene component. Both components may be cemented or uncemented, depending on the surgeon’s preference.
                   Hemiarthroplasty involves only replacement of the humeral side. This is indicated when the humeral head is in-
                   volved primarily and the glenoid is in good condition, as in severe proximal humerus fractures, AVN of the humeral
                   head, and some chronic dislocators. Replacement of the glenoid is contraindicated in the presence of an unrecon-
                   structable massive RC tear because eccentric forces lead to rapid loosening of the glenoid component. Some revision
                   cases require glenoid bone grafting, which increases the complexity and potential blood loss.
                   Shoulder arthroplasty utilizes the beachchair position and the deltopectoral incision (Fig. 10.2-5). The deltopec-
                   toral interval is developed. The subscapularis insertion is incised, and the muscle is reflected medially. The capsule is
                   incised and the joint exposed. The humeral head is dislocated anteriorly, and the head is removed with an oscillating
                   saw. Reamers and broaches are used to prepare the proximal humerus for the prosthesis. If the glenoid is to be resur-
                   faced, it is done before implantation of the final humeral component. The labrum is excised and a motorized reamer
                   is used to remove the cartilage of the glenoid. Glenoid drill holes are made to conform to the back of the prosthesis.
                   The glenoid prosthesis is cemented into place, with the component held in position manually until the cement h   ardens
                   (~15 min). Trial humeral components are placed, and the appropriate sizing of the head and stem are assessed. The
                   final humeral component is inserted with or without cement. The joint is reduced, and the subscapularis is repaired.
                   Skin closure is followed by placement of a sling or shoulder immobilizer. Postop management includes early passive
                   ROM, limiting active internal rotation, and passive external rotation until the subscapularis has healed. Additional
                   limitations may be instituted in revision situations or if RC repair is performed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Rheumatoid arthritis; posttraumatic arthritis; AVN; RC arthropathy; 4–part proximal
                   humerus fracture

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                                                       Clavicle

                                                      Coracoid
                                                       process

                                                  Deltopectoral
                                                        groove

                               Figure 10.2-5. Incision in the deltopectoral groove. (Reproduced with permission
                               from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic
                               Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1994.)

===== PAGE 970 =====
970   c h a p t e r 10.2   Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Semisitting, beachchair

                                    Incision               Deltopectoral incision (Fig. 10.2-5) or extended incision for complex revision

                                    Special                Glenoid and humeral instrumentation, in addition to usual shoulder instruments; mixing and intro-
                                      instrumentation      duction of cement

                                    Unique                 Systemic illnesses of the patient; systemic complications of use of cement in the patient; precau-
                                      considerations       tions in pregnant staff working with methylmethacrylate; usage of laminar flow or UV lighting for
                                                           total joint precautions, depending on the surgeon’s preference and capabilities of the OR

                                    Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv preop, and 48 h postop

                                    Surgical time          2–5 h

                                    Closing                Drain; sling and swathe
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                    200–1,000 mL

                                    Postop care            Immediate passive motion. No active internal rotation for 6 wk.

                                    Mortality              < 1%

                                    Morbidity              Blood loss
                                                           Nerve injury: Rare
                                                           ↓ BP 2° cement: Rare
                                                           Infection

                                    Pain score             8

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              45–80 yr

                                    Male:Female            1:1
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Incidence              Uncommon

                                    Etiology               Osteoarthritis; inflammatory arthritis; trauma; avascular necrosis; systemic disease

                                    Associated             Inflammatory disease; systemic disease; alcoholism; RC pathology; arthritis and radiculopathy;
                                      conditions           cervical arthritis

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Typically, three patient populations present for shoulder arthroplasty: (a) healthy posttrauma, (b) nonrheumatoid
                                   arthritic, and (c) rheumatoid arthritic.

                                   Respiratory              Rheumatoid arthritic patients may exhibit Sx of pleural effusion or pulmonary fibrosis.
                                                            Hoarseness may indicate cricoarytenoid joint (CAJ) involvement → difficult intubation.
                                                            (See Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936.)
                                                            Tests: Consider CXR; PFTs; ABGs in debilitated rheumatoid patients.

                                   Cardiovascular           Rheumatoid arthritic patients may suffer from chronic pericardial effusions, valvular dis-
                                                            ease, and cardiac conduction defects.
                                                            Tests: Consider ECG and ECHO in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis.

                                   Neurological             Arthritic patients may have cervical or lumbar radiculopathies that should be documented
                                                            carefully preop. For example, head flexion may cause cervical cord compression.
                                                            Tests: C-spine radiographs to r/o occult subluxations in rheumatoid patients with neck
                                                            complaints or upper extremity radiculopathy

===== PAGE 971 =====
glenohumeral shoulder arthroplasty          971

                    Musculoskeletal          Arthritic patients may have limited neck and jaw ROM that may require special intubation
                                             techniques. Bony deformities or muscle contracture may necessitate special attention to
                                             positioning.

                    Hematologic              Virtually all nontrauma patients will be on some type of anti-inflammatory medication
                                             that may result in anemia or Plt inhibition. Ideally, patients should D/C NSAIDs at least
                                             5 d preop. Immunosuppressive treatment may ↑ risk of infection.

                    Endocrine                Rheumatoid patients may be on oral corticosteroids and may require supplemental periop-
                                             erative steroids (e.g., 100 mg hydrocortisone q 8 h iv) to treat adrenal suppression, although
                                             the routine use of “stress-dose steroids” has been questioned.

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct (healthy patients); other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100
                                             mcg iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or a combination of GETA and regional anesthesia can be used. An interscalene bra-
                   chial plexus block in combination with GA is excellent for surgical procedures on the shoulder. Unless contraindicat-
                   ed, a long-acting local anesthetic should be used in regional anesthesia for shoulder surgery to ameliorate postop pain.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2). Rheumatoid patients may require awake fiberoptic intuba-
                                             tion (see p. B-6).

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Avoid N2O in patients taking methotrexate. Because
                                             of the typically long duration of these cases, the opioid selected as part of the balanced
                                             anesthetic technique may be given by continuous infusion (e.g., iv sufentanil [0.25–1.0
                                             mcg/kg/h]). Some surgeons prefer muscle relaxation beyond that provided by volatile
                                             anesthetic. The surgeon may request reduction in BP: maintain cerebral perfusion pressure.

                    Emergence                Management of emergence and extubation should be routine except in difficult airway

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                                             cases that require awake extubation. Emergence from anesthesia should be delayed until
                                             patient’s shoulder is securely immobilized in the sling and swathe to prevent undesired
                                             movement of the newly placed prosthesis.

                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Local                    Significant discomfort may be associated with this procedure; therefore, extended postop
                      anesthetics            pain control is desirable. When a single-shot technique is used, 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.5%
                                             ropivacaine (± epinephrine 1:400,000) can be used. Onset is usually within 30 min, with
                                             duration up to 10–12 h. Ropivacaine may be preferred for peripheral nerve block, due to
                                             its decreased cardiotoxicity. For continuous catheter techniques, a postop infusion of 6–8
                                             mL/h of 0.2% of any of these agents is appropriate.

                    Interscalene             Typical anesthetics and doses. Epinephrine [2.5–5 mcg/mL] may be added to the local
                       block                 anesthetic to decrease peak plasma concentrations:
                                             • 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropivacaine, 20–30 mL.
                                             The skin on the top of the shoulder (C3-C4) and the medial aspect of the upper arm (T2)
                                             may require separate subcutaneous field blocks. Phrenic nerve block → hemidiaphragmatic
                                             paralysis is an inevitable consequence of the interscalene block, which may not be tolerated
                                             by patients with significant preexisting respiratory compromise. A continuous interscalene
                                             catheter (tunneled away from the surgical field) may be placed for postop pain management.
                                             Major complications, such as total spinal or pneumothorax resulting from interscalene block,
                                             are extremely rare. Interscalene block is contraindicated in patients with contralateral recur-
                                             rent laryngeal nerve or phrenic nerve palsy. If sedation is needed, midazolam (0.5–1.0 mg
                                             boluses), or propofol (25–100 mcg/kg/min by infusion), titrated to effect, are good choices.

===== PAGE 972 =====
972   c h a p t e r 10.2    Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                   Blood and fluid            Moderate-to-significant blood loss        RBC recovery and reinfusion techniques (e.g., Cell
                                      requirements            IV: 16 ga × 1                             Saver) are advisable because blood loss can be con-
                                                              NS/LR @ 1.5–3.0 mL/kg/h                   siderable. IV in nonoperative upper extremity.

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)            Consider invasive, hemodynamic monitoring in the
                                                                                                        debilitated or elderly patient.
                                                              Precordial Doppler                        Because VAE is a possible complication of the semi-
                                                                                                        sitting position, consider using precordial Doppler
                                                                                                        for cases done in this position.

                                   Positioning                ✓and pad pressure points                  Postural ↓ BP is the most common complication of
                                                              ✓eyes                                     the semisitting position. Changing patient to this posi-
                                                              ↑ VAE risk                                tion gradually can help prevent ↓ BP, as can the use of
                                                                                                        antiembolism stockings and fluid-loading the patient.
                                                                                                        Care with neck positioning. Check head position in-
                                                                                                        traoperatively as shoulder traction may lead to injury.

                                   Interscalene               Total spinal                              Resuscitative equipment, including airway manage-
                                      block                   Epidural anesthesia                       ment tools, should be immediately available.
                                      complications           Local anesthetic toxicity
                                                                (Sz/dysrhythmias)
                                                              Stellate ganglion block (Horner’s
                                                                syndrome)
                                                              Laryngeal nerve block
                                                              Phrenic nerve block
                                                              Pneumothorax
                                                              Persistent paresthesia                    May last ≤ 6 wk.

                                   Other                      Potential for embolic event               Because of the increased risk of VAE during
                                     complications            ↓ BP during prep and positioning          shoulder arthroplasty, N2O may be D/C’d during
                                                                                                        placement of humeral component. Use of methyl-
                                                                                                        methacrylate cement has been associated with the
                                                                                                        sudden onset of ↓ BP and even cardiac arrest, pre-
                                                                                                        sumably due to profound vasodilation ± associated
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                        VAE. ↓ BP during long surgical prep usually can be
                                                                                                        avoided by using light inhalation anesthesia (isoflu-
                                                                                                        rane 0.3–0.5%) to ensure amnesia, with moderate
                                                                                                        muscle relaxation to prevent bucking on ETT, and
                                                                                                        maintaining adequate hydration.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Pain                       PCA (see p. C-3) or regional block/       Combined regional-general anesthetic techniques
                                     management               catheter                                  are excellent for shoulder procedures, especially for
                                                                                                        postop pain management.

                                   Tests                      None indicated routinely

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Borgeat A: Acute and nonacute complications associated with interscalene block and shoulder surgery. Anesthesiology
                                        2001; 95(4):875–80.
                                     2. Cheung E, Willis M, Walker M, Clark R, Frankle MA: Complications in reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop
                                        Surg 2011; 19(7):439–49.
                                     3. Conroy PH, Awad IT: Ultrasound-guided blocks for shoulder surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(6):638–43.
                                     4. Goldberg BA, Smith K, Jackins S, et al: The magnitude and durability of functional improvement after total shoulder
                                        arthroplasty for degenerative joint disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2001; 10(5):464–9.
                                     5. Gray AT: Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia: current state of the art. Anesthesiology 2006; 104:368–73.

===== PAGE 973 =====
Shoulder Girdle Procedures      973

                     6. Green A, Norris TR: Shoulder arthroplasty for advanced glenohumeral arthritis after anterior instability repair. J Shoulder
                        Elbow Surg 2001; 10(6):539–45.
                     7. Liu SS, Strodtbeck WM, Richman JM, Wu CL: A comparison of regional versus general anesthesia for ambulatory anesthesia:
                        a meta analysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesth Analg 2005; 101(6):1634–42.
                     8. Murphy DB: Upper extremity blocks for day surgery. Tech in Reg Anes Pain Manag 2000; 4(1):19–29.
                     9. Pohl A, Cullen DJ: Cerebral ischemia during shoulder surgery in the upright position: a case series. J Clin Anesth 2005;
                        17(6):463–9.
                    10. Reginster JY, Damas P, Franchimont P: Anaesthetic risks in osteoarticular disorders. Clin Rheum 1985; 4(1):30–8.
                    11. Shapiro J, Zuckerman JD: Glenohumeral arthroplasty: indications and preoperative considerations. Instr Course Lect
                        2002; 51:3–10.
                    12. Wand RJ, Dear KE, Bigsby E, Wand JS: A review of shoulder replacement surgery. J Perioper Pract 2012; 22(11):354–9.

                   SHOULDER GIRDLE PROCEDURES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Trauma about the shoulder girdle in young patients ranges from athletic injuries to life-threatening
                   trauma. Some of these injuries include common athletic injuries, such as acromioclavicular joint separations, which
                   rarely require surgery unless there are associated acromial or clavicular fractures. Posterior sternoclavicular dis-
                   locations may warrant surgical stabilization if the trachea is compressed. Clavicle fractures, frequently associated
                   with scapular fractures, occasionally require open reduction.
                   Scapular fractures involving the glenoid also may require surgical stabilization. Extreme fractures involving the
                   shoulder girdle (scapulothoracic dissociations) include scapular fracture, clavicle fracture, subclavian or axillary
                   artery disruption, and brachial plexus injury. These may coexist with proximal humerus fractures, rib fractures, and
                   pneumothorax. In the older, debilitated patient, the most common injury is proximal humeral fracture, which may be
                   amenable to surgical stabilization or may be so comminuted as to warrant hemiarthroplasty.
                   A displaced proximal humerus fracture may require open reduction internal fixation with a plate and screws or
                   hemiarthroplasty through a deltopectoral approach utilizing a beachchair position (see Surgery for Shoulder In-
                   stability, p. 964, and Glenohumeral Shoulder Arthroplasty, p. 969). A displaced clavicle fracture may require open
                   reduction internal fixation with a plate and screws utilizing a beachchair or supine position. A scapular body fracture

                                                                                                                                                             Orthopedic Surgery
                   would be stabilized with a plate and screws via a posterior approach utilizing a prone or lateral position (see Surgery
                   for Shoulder Instability, p. 964). As with other shoulder procedures, relaxation is necessary upon awakening the
                   patient after the shoulder is placed into an immobilization device.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma about the shoulder girdle

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                   Anterior                                                    Posterior

                     Position                      Semisitting or prone                                        Lateral decubitus (scapula)

                     Incision                      Anterior, superior, or oblique for acromioclavicular;       Posterior lateral border or medial
                                                   supraclavicular for clavicle; deltopectoral for proxi-      border of scapula, spinous scapula,
                                                   mal humerus and glenoid                                     depending on location

                     Special instrumentation       Plates and screws; tension band wiring; proximal            ⇐
                                                   humerus replacement for comminuted fractures

                     Unique considerations          Multiple traumas warrant early stabilization; may          ⇐
                                                   require vascular repair and brachial plexus exploration.

                     Antibiotics                   Cefazolin 1 g iv                                            ⇐

                     Surgical time                 2–10 h                                                      ⇐

                     Closing considerations         Fracture-dependent; most commonly requires                 ⇐
                                                   a pplication of sling and swathe.

===== PAGE 974 =====
974   c h a p t e r 10.2    Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                   Anterior                                               Posterior

                                    EBL                            200–1200 mL or greater, depending on trauma            ⇐

                                    Postop care                    May require ICU for multiple-trauma patients; other-   ⇐
                                                                   wise, early mobilization with physical therapy

                                    Mortality                      Mortality dependent on associated conditions:          ⇐
                                                                    Infection
                                                                    Neurologic injury
                                                                    Respiratory failure
                                                                    Massive blood loss
                                                                    Unrecognized pneumothorax
                                                                    Cardiac tamponade

                                    Morbidity                      Nerve injury (axillary, brachial plexus)               Axillary and suprascapular
                                                                   Stiffness                                              ⇐
                                                                   Poor healing                                           ⇐

                                    Pain score                     6–10                                                   6 (clavicle and AC joint)
                                                                                                                          8 (scapula and proximal humerus)

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                15–80 yr, depending on nature of trauma

                                    Male:Female              5:1

                                    Incidence                Common

                                    Etiology                 Trauma

                                    Associated               Axillary nerve palsy; musculocutaneous nerve palsy; brachial plexus injury; arterial disruption in
                                      conditions             high-energy trauma; brachial and great vessel injuries and posterior sternoclavicular dislocation;
                                                             pneumothorax
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Brachial Plexus Surgery, p. 976.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Cole PA, Gauger EM, Schroder LK: Management of scapular fractures. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2012; 20(3):130–41.
                                     2. Pandya NK, Namdari S, Hosalkar HS: Displaced clavicle fractures in adolescents: facts, controversies, and current trends.
                                        J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2012; 20(8):498–505.

                                   BRACHIAL PLEXUS SURGERY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Brachial plexus injuries occur most commonly in two groups: traumatic birth injuries and high-energy
                                   trauma. Surgery ranges from exploration with neurolysis, to repairs, to cable nerve grafting. Typically, the latter
                                   requires grafting with the sural nerve, and nerve pedicle transfer, such as transfer of the spinal accessory nerve
                                   to denervated paralyzed muscle, combined with muscle transfers. C5-C6 is most commonly injured in obstetrical
                                   (Erb’s) palsy. Injuries in adults are more commonly closed-traction. Similar to obstetrical palsy, they occur with an
                                   outstretched, abducted arm with the neck rotated in the opposite direction. The most severe form includes complete
                                   avulsion at the preganglionic level, presenting with a Horner’s syndrome, winging of the scapula, and a flail arm.

===== PAGE 975 =====
brachial plexus surgery      975

                              Dorsal scapular nerve to rhomboids

                              Long thoracic nerve to serratus anterior                                                            C4

                              Suprascapular nerve to supraspinatus and infraspinatus                                              C5
                              Pectoralis minor muscle
                                                                                                                                  C6
                              LATERAL CORD
                                                                                                                                  C7
                              POSTERIOR CORD

                              Musculocutaneous nerve                                                                              T1

                              Axillary nerve
                                                                                                                                  T2
                              Coracobrachialis muscle

                                                                                                                                           Medial
                                                                                                                                    pectoral nerve

                              RADIAL NERVE                                                                                                 Lateral
                              MEDIAN NERVE                                                                                          pectoral nerve
                              Axillary artery
                              ULNAR NERVE                                                                                          MEDIAL CORD

                              Medial cutaneous
                              nerve of forearm
                              Medial cutaneous
                              nerve of arm
                              Thoracodorsal nerve to latissimus dorsi
                              Latissimus dorsi muscle

                                Figure 10.2-6. Brachial plexus: Its division into supraclavicular and infraclavicular
                                portions is apparent. The proximal origin of the dorsal scapular nerve and the long
                                thoracic nerve are demonstrated. The T1 spinal nerve arises below the head of the
                                1st rib. The relation of the cords of the plexus to the axillary artery at the level of
                                the coracoid process (origin of the pectoralis minor and coracobrachialis muscles)

                                                                                                                                                                  Orthopedic Surgery
                                is illustrated. The posterior cord and the radial nerve behind the axillary artery are
                                stippled for clarity. (Reproduced with permission from Tindall GT, Cooper PR, Barrow
                                DL: The Practice of Neurosurgery, Vol III. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

                   These are typically “supraclavicular” injuries, and have a poorer prognosis. Surgical exposure may proceed above
                   the clavicle similar to an anterior neck dissection or may require an extension below the clavicle. Occasionally, an
                   osteotomy of the clavicle for extensive dissection is required. For axillary nerve dissection, a posterior approach also
                   is used. Open injuries, such as gunshot or knife wounds, are typically “infraclavicular” and have a better prognosis.
                   (See diagram of brachial plexus, Fig. 10.2-6.)
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Obstetrical palsy; adult trauma—most commonly motorcycle accident

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                        Lateral decubitus or semisitting

                     Incision                        Supra- or infraclavicular, extensile to include deltopectoral incision. Clavicle osteotomy incision
                                                     will provide for improved exposure. Supraclavicular incision used for supraclavicular brachial
                                                     plexus.

                     Special instrumentation         Nerve stimulator

                     Unique considerations           Associated trauma

                     Antibiotics                     Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                     Surgical time                   4–10 h

===== PAGE 976 =====
976   c h a p t e r 10.2   Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Closing considerations     Other incisions if nerve grafts obtained

                                    EBL                        400–2000 mL

                                    Mortality                  Minimal

                                    Morbidity                  Bleeding
                                                               Hematoma
                                                               Pneumothorax
                                                               Clavicular nonunion

                                    Pain score                 8

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                   Infants and children: 3 mo–8 yr; adults: 20–40 yr

                                    Male:Female                 Adult: 5:1

                                    Incidence                   Infants: 0.3–8/1000 births; adults: commonly associated with motorcycle accidents

                                    Etiology                    Obstetrical palsy; trauma

                                    Associated conditions       None known

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   (Procedures covered: shoulder girdle procedures; brachial plexus surgery)

                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   With the exception of traumatic birth injuries, most of these patients are healthy males who have suffered major
                                   blunt or penetrating trauma. For the acute and subacute trauma victim, the major anesthesia-related concerns cen-
                                   ter on associated traumatic injuries. Many adult trauma victims with brachial plexus injuries will be operated on in
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   the first few days after their injury. For infants (usually operated on at 6–12 mo), the major anesthesia-related con-
                                   cerns are those routinely associated with pediatric anesthesia (see Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery, p. 1393). Approxi-
                                   mately half of all trauma victims are intoxicated. The anesthesia-related implications of ethanol intoxication include
                                   decreased anesthetic requirements, diuresis, vasodilation, and hypothermia.

                                   Respiratory               As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. Look for evidence of occult
                                                             chest injury, including pneumothorax (tachypnea, wheezing, ↓ BP, ↓ PaO2, CXR changes)
                                                             and pulmonary contusion (multiple rib fracture, ↓ PaO2).
                                                             Tests: Consider CXR and ABGs in victims of significant trauma; other tests as indicated
                                                             from H&P.

                                   Cardiovascular            As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. Look for evidence of occult
                                                             cardiac or mediastinal injuries, such as myocardial contusion (e.g., ECG abnormalities
                                                             typically consistent with ischemia) or great vessel rupture (e.g., widened mediastinum).
                                                             Tests: Consider CXR (with NG tube in place to assess mediastinal widening) and ECG in
                                                             victims of significant trauma; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Neurological              Victims of shoulder trauma are vulnerable to brachial plexus damage. Look for evidence
                                                             of upper extremity nerve dysfunction and document any injuries preop. The possibility of
                                                             closed-head injury also should be considered.
                                                             Tests: Head CT prior to beginning a procedure under GA in a patient with evidence of
                                                             head trauma

                                   Musculoskeletal           As suggested by coexisting disease or acute trauma injuries. The amount of force necessary
                                                             to produce a brachial plexus injury mandates a C-spine series to r/o C-spine fracture in all
                                                             victims of brachial plexus trauma.

===== PAGE 977 =====
brachial plexus surgery       977

                    Laboratory            In general, most victims of significant trauma are best served by obtaining a wide variety
                                          of baseline lab studies to screen for unrecognized injury. These studies generally should
                                          include Hct, CBC, ABGs, UA, renal function tests, LFTs; serum amylase.

                    Premedication         None

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA is preferred over regional techniques because of the unpredictable and prolonged
                   length of these procedures and the need to evaluate brachial plexus function postop.

                    Induction             Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) is mandatory in unscheduled cases, unless awake
                                          fiberoptic intubation is performed (see Anesthetic Considerations for Thoracolumbar
                                          Neurosurgical Procedures, p. 127). C-spine fracture patients or those with facial injuries
                                          may require awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6) or other special airway techniques, as
                                          indicated from H&P. Hemodynamically unstable, acute-trauma patients can be induced
                                          more safely with etomidate (0.3–0.4 mg/kg iv) or ketamine (1–3 mg/kg iv).

                    Maintenance           Balanced anesthesia with low-dose isoflurane (0.4–0.6%), iv fentanyl, and N2O in O2 is
                                          suitable for stable patients. Hemodynamically unstable, acute-trauma victims undergoing
                                          emergency surgery are not likely to tolerate this regimen and are better served by using a
                                          combination of medications designed to have minimal hemodynamic consequences (e.g.,
                                          fentanyl for analgesia, vecuronium for muscle relaxation, and scopolamine or midazolam
                                          for amnesia). N2O is best avoided in the trauma patient. For brachial plexus surgery, some
                                          surgeons prefer minimal muscle relaxation after tracheal intubation so that a nerve stimu-
                                          lator can be used to help identify surgical anatomy.

                    Emergence             Management of emergence and extubation should be routine except in difficult airway
                                          or full-stomach cases, which require that extubation be delayed until the patient’s airway
                                          reflexes have returned and the patient is fully awake.

                    Blood and fluid       Significant blood loss                  IV catheter placed in the nonoperative upper ex-
                       requirements       IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                      tremity is usually adequate in hemodynamically

                                                                                                                                                Orthopedic Surgery
                                          NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h + replace-        stable patients. Unstable, acute-trauma victims
                                          ment of blood loss @ 3 × volume         require a minimum of 2 large-bore iv catheters or
                                          Fluid warmer                            large-bore central lines.
                                          Airway humidifier

                    Monitoring            Standard monitors (see p. B-1).         Invasive hemodynamic monitoring and TEE
                                          ± SSEP                                  should be considered in acute, multiple-trauma
                                          ± TEE                                   victims. Some surgeons request SSEP to make con-
                                                                                  tinuous assessment of preop intact brachial plexus
                                                                                  possible. When using SSEP monitoring, high doses
                                                                                  of volatile anesthetic agents should be avoided be-
                                                                                  cause they adversely affect SSEP readings.

                    Positioning           ✓and pad pressure points                Postural ↓ BP is the most common complication
                                          ✓eyes                                   of the semisitting position, particularly during the
                                          VAE risk                                surgical prep period. SCD or antiembolism stock-
                                                                                  ings may be beneficial. VAE is a potential compli-
                                                                                  cation of this position.

                    Complications         Hemodynamic instability                 Previously unrecognized injuries (e.g., pneumo-
                                                                                  thorax, cardiac tamponade, intracranial bleeding)
                                                                                  should be considered as a cause of unexplained
                                                                                  intraop hemodynamic instability in all acute-
                                                                                  trauma victims.
                                          Possible VAE                            VAE risk is increased with patient in semisitting
                                                                                  position.

===== PAGE 978 =====
978   c h a p t e r 10.2     Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Sepsis                                        Many trauma victims survive the initial insult
                                     (cont’d)                  ARDS                                          only to die later of sepsis or ARDS.

                                   Pain                        PCA (see p. C-3)
                                     management

                                   Tests                       Based on concurrent injuries

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Johnstone RE, Graf DF: Acute trauma with multiple injuries. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2001; 14(2):211–5.
                                     2. Lee SK, Wolfe SW: Nerve transfers for the upper extremity: new horizons in nerve reconstruction. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
                                        2012; 20(8):506–17.
                                     3. Popinchalk SP, Schaffer AA: Physical examination of upper extremity compressive neuropathies. Orthop Clin North Am
                                        2012; 43(4):417–30.
                                     4. Thompson RW, Petrinec D, Toursarkissian B: I. Surgical treatment of thoracic outlet compression syndromes. II.
                                        Supraclavicular exploration and vascular reconstruction. Ann Vasc Surg 1997; 11(4):442–51.

                                   ARM SURGERY
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Surgical procedures on the arm are primarily for trauma or tumor surgery. Other procedures include
                                   extended approaches from the shoulder for significant trauma or tendon transfer. Exploration of peripheral nerves, most
                                   commonly of the radial nerve, are also included in this category, as are distal extensile approaches from the elbow for trauma
                                   or for lateral epicondylitis (“tennis elbow”). Depending on the lesion or fracture, the incision is developed through an inter-
                                   nervous or intramuscular compartment. Procedures include excisional biopsy for soft-tissue or bone tumors of the arm;
                                   tumor excision, which may be marginal, wide, or radical, depending on the tumor encountered; tendon transfers, such as
                                   pectoralis transfer to replace biceps function, used primarily for brachial plexus injuries; and fractures and nonunion frac-
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   tures of the humerus. Positioning and location of incision is dependent on the level of the pathology. For example, for frac-
                                   tures involving the proximal half of the humerus, the standard deltopectoral incision may be extended distally along the
                                   interval between the biceps and triceps on the lateral aspect of the arm. This approach requires a beachchair (Figure 10.2-7)
                                   or, occasionally, supine position. Distal-third fractures are best approached posteriorly with the triceps-splitting approach.
                                   Distal fractures that extend into the elbow joint often require an olecranon osteotomy to visualize the fractured joint surface.
                                   Posterior approaches to the distal humerus are performed in either the lateral or prone position.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma; tumor

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                  Supine; semisitting position for extended deltopectoral; lateral decubitus or prone for distal hu-
                                                              merus fractures

                                    Incision                  Anterolateral approach; posterior approach in the lateral decubitus or prone position

                                    Special                   Plate and screws; external fixators; intramedullary rods; occasionally, methylmethacrylate ce-
                                      instrumentation         ment for tumor surgery; sterile tourniquet for distal humerus; I.I. for fracture surgery

                                    Unique                    CT-guided sclerotherapy preop for vascular tumors; longitudinal incisions for biopsy and tumor
                                      considerations          excisions (not violating fascial planes)

                                    Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                    Surgical time             45 min–6 h

                                    Closing                   Drain frequently required
                                      considerations

===== PAGE 979 =====
Arm surgery   979

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     EBL                    Minimal—500+ mL, depending on pathology

                     Mortality              Varies with pathology

                     Morbidity              Bleeding
                                            Shoulder stiffness
                                            Nerve injury

                     Pain score             4–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Varies with procedure

                     Male:Female            Varies with procedure

                     Incidence              Procedure-dependent

                     Etiology               Fractures; nerve entrapment (radial) following trauma; tumors

                     Associated             Radial or ulnar nerve injury with humeral fractures
                       conditions

                                                                                                                                    Orthopedic Surgery

                                Figure 10.2-7. Beachchair positioning for shoulder surgery. Image intensification
                                may be needed for intraoperative radiography (e.g., fracture surgery). (Reproduced
                                by permission from Robinson CM, Page RS: Severely impacted valgus proximal
                                humerus fractures. J Bone Joint Surg 2004; 86A:143–55.)

===== PAGE 980 =====
980   c h a p t e r 10.2   Shoulder/Arm Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Patients presenting for arm procedures are relatively young and otherwise healthy. Most of these patients present for
                                   elective repair of a traumatic injury. The preop workup is appropriate to patient’s medical history. Some arm proce-
                                   dures, such as repair of a compound fracture, require immediate attention and necessitate emergency surgery and
                                   full-stomach considerations (p. B-5).

                                   Laboratory               Hb/Hct (healthy patients); other tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication            Mild-to-moderate premedication (e.g., in adults, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, fentanyl 50–100
                                                            mcg iv, titrated to effect) is often desirable before placement of a regional block.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GA or regional anesthesia, or a combination of the two, can be used for surgical pro-
                                   cedures on the arm. A brachial plexus block via the supraclavicular, infraclavicular or axillary approach is
                                   excellent for procedures on the distal arm. The interscalene approach to the brachial plexus is suitable for
                                   more proximal humerus procedures. Regional anesthesia alone is a means of avoiding the risk of aspiration
                                   pneumonitis associated with GA in the patient with a full stomach. Procedures longer than 3 h usually require
                                   general anesthesia in addition to regional. Regional anesthesia with sedation is usually well tolerated in shorter
                                   procedures.
                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) except in acute-trauma patients, where rapid-sequence
                                                            induction is appropriate (see p. B-5)

                                   Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3)

                                   Emergence                Management of emergence and extubation should be routine, except in difficult airway
                                                            cases, which require awake extubation. Skin closure is frequently followed by application
                                                            of a splint; patient should remain anesthetized during splinting procedure.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Regional anesthesia:

                                   Local                    2% lidocaine or 1.5% mepivacaine have similar onset times (10–15 min) and similar dura-
                                     anesthetics            tion (4–6 h). If extended postop pain control is desired, 0.5% bupivacaine or ropivacaine
                                                            (± epinephrine 1:400,000) can be used. Onset is usually within 30 min, with duration of
                                                            8–12 h. If GA is planned, 0.25% ropivacaine or bupivacaine is sufficient.

                                   Brachial plexus          For proximal humerus surgery an interscalene block is indicated with a catheter for
                                     block                  postop pain management. Supraclavicular, infraclavicular and axillary approaches
                                                            are all suitable for more distal surgery. Supraclavicular or infraclavicular blocks are
                                                            better tolerated in fracture patients, because the arm need not be moved. Ultrasound
                                                            guidance can improve speed and comfort during block placement. A peripheral
                                                            nerve catheter (infraclavicular approach) may be placed to prolong pain relief in
                                                            appropriate patients.
                                                            • 2% lidocaine or 1.5% mepivacaine 30 mL for procedures lasting ≤ 2.5 h.
                                                            • 0.5% bupivacaine, or ropivacaine 30 mL for procedures lasting > 2.5 h.
                                                            If sedation is needed, midazolam (0.5–1.0 mg boluses) or propofol (25–100 mcg/kg/min by
                                                            infusion), titrated to effect, are good choices. Sensation to the skin of the upper inner arm is
                                                            supplied by the intercostobrachial nerve (T2), which must be blocked separately.

===== PAGE 981 =====
Arm surgery     981

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Shoulder Arthroscopy, Removal of Bone Spur (Subacromial Decompression):
                   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yb2YsSbSdck
                   Brachial Plexus – Structure and Location – 3D Anatomy Tutuorial: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hrKesc_XSzo
                   Ultrasound-Guided Interscalene Brachial Plexus Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dg9BJ-32yLc
                   Ultrasound-Guided Infraclavicular Brachial Plexus Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hRyDtXrfYqc
                   Ultrasound-Guided Supraclavicular Brachial Plexus Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztOIvfjsB-U

                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery

===== PAGE 982 =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.3 Spine Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Eugene J. Carragee, MD, FACS
                                           Ivan Cheng, MD
                                           Nima Salari, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Adam P. Brown, MD
                                           C. Philip Larson, Jr., MD, CM

===== PAGE 984 =====
MINIMALLY INVASIVE POSTERIOR LUMBAR DISCECTOMY
                                   (MICRODISCECTOMY)
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Since the mid-1990s, a number of techniques have been developed to allow the decompression of lum-
                                   bar roots (removal of disc material) with as little trauma to the nerves and surrounding tissues as possible. In most
                                   instances, little or no bone is removed, and therefore, this is not technically a laminectomy or laminotomy. These
                                   minimally invasive procedures typically are carried out in healthy young or middle-aged adults with sciatica and are
                                   not done for more involved pathology, such as deformity, tumor, or infection. Transpedicular fixation and short-
                                   segment fusions may be attempted using modifications of these techniques.
                                   Microdiscectomy approach: This can be done under GA, regional (epidural or spinal), or local anesthesia. The pa-
                                   tient is placed in a prone or kneeling position, and the posterior landmarks are palpated to identify the approximate
                                   level (e.g., L4/5); then the overlying skin is infiltrated with local anesthetic. A spinal needle is placed to the level of
                                   the lamina, and an x-ray or fluoroscopic image is taken to confirm the level. A 1” incision is made over the proposed
                                   interspace, and using either traditional or specialized retractors, the soft tissue is displaced to expose the ligamentum
                                   flavum. With the use of an operating microscope, the ligamentum flavum is removed, the nerve retracted, and the
                                   extruded disc excised. For a single level, this should take between 30 and 90 min, depending on the size of the patient
                                   and whether there is any scarring or adhesions from previous surgery.
                                   Variant approach: Percutaneous discectomy through a posterolateral approach is usually reserved for “contained
                                   discs”—protrusions into, but not through, the outer annulus of the disc. These are usually done under MAC with
                                   local anesthetic. The percutaneous instruments may be positioned using fluoroscopic guidance with or without a
                                   fiberoptic light source and camera/monitor setup. The disc space is entered posterolaterally. The surgeon usually
                                   avoids anesthetizing the area around the nerve root so that the patient can alert the team if the root is struck by
                                   an instrument (quite painful). After the disc space is entered, fluoroscopic or camera images are used to guide the
                                   surgeon in the removal of the herniated disc. The disc material can be removed with specialized grabbers or auto-
                                    matic power-driven shavers.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic back pain 2° herniated lumbar disc; lumbar radiculopathy
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Microdiscectomy                                     Percutaneous Discectomy

                                    Position                 Prone or kneeling, with bolster or frame sup-       Prone or lateral decubitus
                                                             port. The abdomen must hang free to decom-
                                                             press the epidural veins.

                                    Incision                 Posterior midline or slightly off midline, at the   About 8–12 cm lateral to the midline at the
                                                             appropriate vertebral level                         appropriate vertebral level

                                    Special                  Microscope; light source; specialized retrac-       Percutaneous instruments, including trocars,
                                      instrumentation        tion and dissection instruments for working in      sounds, and arthroscopic-type grabbers
                                                             a small, deep incision                              and shavers; fluoroscopy; and, sometimes,
                                                                                                                 camera/monitor and fiberoptic light setup

                                    Unique                   Often outpatient procedure. Need to make            Patient must be alert enough to respond to
                                      considerations         room for microscope at head of bed.                 pain if nerve roots are encountered.

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin l g iv                                    ⇐

                                    Surgical time            0.5–1.5 h                                           1–2 h

                                    Closing                  Minimal suturing                                    Usually no closure (Band-Aids)
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      25–100 mL                                           Minimal

                             984

===== PAGE 985 =====
Minimally Invasive Anterior Lumbar Interbody Fusion through a Transpsoas Approach                  985

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                             Microdiscectomy                                  Percutaneous Discectomy

                     Postop care             PACU. Mobilization as soon as tolerated.         PACU → home. Mobilization as tolerated.
                                             Usually discharged within 24 h.

                     Mortality               Very rare                                        ⇐

                     Morbidity               Nerve injury                                     Failure to decompress the nerve adequately
                                             Dural laceration                                 –
                                             Infection                                        ⇐

                     Pain score              4                                                2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               16–60 yr

                     Male:Female             3:2

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Degenerative; trauma (rare)

                   Minimally invasive Anterior Lumbar Interbody
                   Fusion Through a Transpsoas Approach

                                                                                                                                                        Orthopedic Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Traditional open techniques of lumbar fusion have shown long-term clinical efficacy. However, the
                   morbidity of the approach, extensive blood loss, and length of postop recovery can offset the benefits of the interven-
                   tion. Recently, minimally invasive techniques have decreased morbidity. One approach involves lateral approach via
                   a small incision through retroperitoneal fat and the psoas major muscle for access to the lateral lumbar spine with
                   the aid of neuromonitoring to avoid nerves of the lumbar plexus.
                   The orientation of neural structures of the lumbar plexus has a relatively high level of variability, necessitating the use
                   of neuromonitoring for this approach. After induction of GETA, the surgeon places needle electrodes into muscles
                   of the bilateral lower extremities to record the EMG response to lumbar nerve stimulation. The EMG threshold is
                   the current (mA) required to stimulate the nerve, producing a muscle contraction. Direct nerve stimulation studies
                   have shown that normal nerves elicit an EMG response with an average of 2 mA. Neuromuscular blockade should be
                   avoided, and the use of intravenous anesthesia is encouraged.
                   The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position and held in position with straps and tape. The arms should
                   remain in a neutral position, and an axillary roll is placed just inferior to the axilla to support the area of the upper
                   rib cage to relieve pressure on the axillary nerve and artery. The table is typically flexed to increase the distance
                   between the iliac crest and the rib cage to gain access to the lateral lumbar spine. Fluoroscopic imaging is required
                    to determine true anteroposterior and lateral axes of the desired spinal level. After the patient has been prepped and
                    draped, an incision is made posteriorly at the border between the erector spinae muscles and the abdominal obliques
                    to accommodate the surgeon’s index finger and help identify the retroperitoneal space. With care, perforation of the
                    peritoneum is avoided, and the finger is used to sweep this anteriorly. After identifying the psoas muscle, the index
                    finger is swept up to a previously marked direct lateral target over the center of the affected intervertebral segment.
                    An incision is made on the patient’s side, through which dilators are placed, and the index finger is used to escort

===== PAGE 986 =====
986   c h a p t e r 10.3     Spine Surgery

                                   them safely to the psoas muscle, all while protecting the intraabdominal contents. Careful passage of the dilators and
                                   EMG neuromonitoring avoid injury to the lumbar plexus. Once the self-retaining retractor system is positioned, care
                                   is taken to determine the course of the lumbar plexus in relation to the blades of the retractor. Once the retractor is
                                   positioned over the disc space, under direct vision, a discectomy is performed. Care is taken not to disrupt the ante-
                                   rior longitudinal ligament and risk injury to the main vascular structures coursing anteriorly.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic back pain; lumbar radiculopathy

                                    ■■ Summary of Procedure
                                    Position                                        Lateral decubitus with axillary roll. Table flexed.

                                    Incision                                        Posterior border between erector spinae and abdominal oblique muscles

                                    Special instrumentation                         Fluoroscopic imaging

                                    Unique considerations                           EMG monitoring: avoid muscle relaxation

                                    Antibiotics                                     Cefazolin 1g iv

                                    Surgical time                                   2–3 h

                                    Closing considerations                          Minimal suturing

                                    EBL                                             20–100 mL

                                    Postop care                                     PACU. Mobilization as tolerated. Usually discharged within 24 h.

                                    Mortality                                       Rare

                                    Morbidity                                       Reported complication rates: 6.2–52%
                                                                                      Iliopsoas weakness
                                                                                      Anterior thigh numbness
                                                                                      Quadriceps weakness
                                                                                      Radiculopathy
                                                                                      Foot drop
                                                                                      Durotomy
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Pain score                                      4–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                   Age range                 30–80 yr

                                   Male:Female               3:2

                                   Incidence                 Increasingly common

                                   Etiology                  Degenerative

                                   Suggested Reading
                                     1. Adamus M, Hrabalek L, Wanek T, Gabrhelik T, Zapletalova J: Intraoperative reversal of neuromuscular block with sugammadex
                                        or neostigmine during extreme lateral interbody fusion, a novel technique for spine surgery. J Anesth 2011; 25(5):716–20.
                                     2. Arnold PM, Anderson KK, McGuire RA Jr: The lateral transpsoas approach to the lumbar and thoracic spine: a review. Surg
                                        Neurol Int 2012; 3(Suppl 3):S198–215.
                                     3. Ozgur BM, Aryan HE, Pimenta L, Taylor WR: Extreme Lateral Interbody Fusion (XLIF): a novel surgical technique for
                                        anterior lumbar interbody fusion. Spine J 2006; 6(4):435–43.
                                     4. Rodgers WB, Gerber EJ, Patterson J: Intraoperative and early postoperative complications in extreme lateral interbody fusion:
                                        an analysis of 600 cases. Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2011; 36(1):26–32.
                                     5. Tohmeh AG, Rodgers WB, Peterson MD: Dynamically evoked, discrete-threshold electromyography in the extreme lateral
                                        interbody fusion approach. J Neurosurg Spine 2011; 14(1):31–7.
                                     6. Youssef JA, McAfee PC, Patty CA, et al: Minimally invasive surgery: lateral approach interbody fusion: results and review.
                                        Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2010; 35(26 Suppl):S302–11.

===== PAGE 987 =====
Minimally Invasive Anterior Lumbar Interbody Fusion through a Transpsoas Approach              987

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients undergoing minimally invasive spine procedures are no more likely than the general population to have any
                   specific medical condition; they require normal preop evaluation.

                    Musculoskeletal         Because these patients may have chronic back pain with radiculopathy, they may not be
                                            suitable candidates for regional anesthetic techniques. Postop exacerbation of symptoms
                                            may be incorrectly ascribed to the anesthetic technique. A careful motor and sensory eval-
                                            uation of the lower extremities should be documented. Patients commonly taking centrally
                                            acting analgesics or narcotics may require higher doses of sedative-hypnotics and analge-
                                            sics in the periop period.

                    Hematologic             Patients should stop taking aspirin or NSAIDs at least 2 wk before surgery. In addition, an
                                            INR or PT and PTT should be checked preop.
                                            Tests: Hct; Plt; INR

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Standard premedication (see p. B-1)

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Minimally invasive spine procedures are commonly done under GA; however, local or re-
                   gional anesthetic techniques are suitable in selected patients. Percutaneous discectomies typically require only MAC
                   with sedation. These patients must be awake to alert the surgeon to inadvertent nerve root contact. In some centers,
                   regional anesthesia (spinal or epidural) is the anesthetic of choice.
                   General Anesthesia:

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2). Consider using wire-reinforced ETT to prevent kinking,
                                            with patient in prone position.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Usually 1–2 h operation. After exposure, further muscle
                                            relaxant use is unnecessary.

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                    Emergence               No special considerations

                    MAC                     See p. B-4–B-5.

                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Spinal                  Patient in sitting, lateral decubitus, or prone position for placement of subarachnoid block.
                                            Doses of local anesthetics should be adequate to provide a high lumbar level of sensory
                                            anesthesia (e.g., bupivacaine 6–10 mg with fentanyl 10 mcg).

                    Epidural                Patient in sitting or lateral decubitus position for placement of epidural catheter. A test
                                            dose (e.g., 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine [5 mcg/mL]) is administered,
                                            and the patient is observed for development of subarachnoid block or Sx of an intravascu-
                                            lar injection. Titrate lidocaine 2% with epinephrine (3–5 mL at a time) until desired surgi-
                                            cal level is obtained.

                    Blood and fluid         IV: 18–20 ga × 1                       Blood not likely to be required.
                       requirements         NS/LR @ 5 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1)

===== PAGE 988 =====
988   c h a p t e r 10.3    Spine Surgery

                                   Positioning                ✓ and pad pressure points                Lateral position: use axillary roll
                                                                                                       Prone position: Jackson table, Wilson frame, or
                                                                                                       bolsters to support shoulders/hips and optimize
                                                                                                       ventilation.
                                                                                                       Knee-chest position: Andrews table.
                                                              ✓ eyes                                   Place head in cushioned holder with cutout for
                                                                                                       eyes, nose, chin (e.g., ProneView®). Make certain
                                                                                                       eyes, nose, and chin are free and clear. Ensure that
                                                                                                       there is no posterior pressure on the ET tube, as this
                                                                                                       may result in injury to the uvula or soft palate. Pad
                                                                                                       elbows, knees, other pressure points. Limit both
                                                                                                       upper arm abduction and elbow extension to < 90°.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Urinary retention in the older             Rx: Consider catheterization.
                                                              patient
                                                              Transient numbness/paresthesias,           Due to nerve-root irritation from operation.
                                                              weakness                                   Rx with analgesics and/or muscle relaxants
                                                                                                         methocarbamol, cyclobenzaprine.

                                   Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                               PO analgesics may be suitable: acetaminophen
                                     management               Ketorolac 30 mg iv                         and codeine (Tylenol #3 1–2 tab q 4–6 h) or oxy-
                                                                                                         codone and acetaminophen (Percocet 1 tab q 6 h)
                                                              Epidural analgesia (p. C-2)                Dose prior to the removal of an e pidural catheter at
                                                                                                         the end of the case if it is already in place (p. C-2).

                                   Tests                      As indicated by patient status             Patient usually discharged from hospital within
                                                                                                         24–48 h.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Javedan S, Sonntag VK: Lumbar disc herniation: microsurgical approach. Neurosurgery 2003; 52(1):160–4.
                                     2. Maroon JC: Current concepts in minimally invasive discectomy. Neurosurgery 2002; 51(5 Suppl):S137–45.
                                     3. Rodriguez HE, Connolly MM, Dracopoulos H, et al: Anterior access to the lumbar spine: laparoscopic versus open. Am Surg
                                        2002; 68(11):978–83.
                                     4. Schick U, Dohnert J: Technique of microendoscopy in medial lumbar disc herniation. Minim Invasive Neurosurg 2002;
                                        45(3):139–41.
                                     5. Spengler DM: Lumbar disc herniation. In Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Chapman MW, ed. Lippincott
                                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 3765–74.
                                     6. Surgical treatment of lumbar disk disorders. JAMA 2006;296(20):2485–7.

                                   SPINAL RECONSTRUCTION AND FUSION—THORACIC
                                   AND THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Traditionally, most spinal procedures have been approached posteriorly. The advent of surgical treat-
                                   ment for vertebral TB and postpolio spinal deformities during the 1960s saw the development of surgical approaches
                                   to the anterior spine. These procedures initially were reserved for patients with significant deformities, especially
                                   kyphosis. More recently, the treatment of traumatic, neoplastic, and degenerative conditions have been included in

===== PAGE 989 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Thoracic and Thoracolumbar Spine                   989

                   the anterior approach. Regardless of the condition under treatment, the approach is similar for a given level. There
                   are several more or less distinct types of surgical exposures, depending on the level.
                   Cervicothoracic approach: Most cephalad and difficult is the approach to the upper thoracic spine (T1-T3). This
                   generally includes a modified anterior cervical exposure with a caudal extension, including a resection of the clavicle,
                   part of the manubrium, and sometimes the rib at the thoracic outlet. Dangers in this exposure are to the great vessels
                   at the thoracic outlet, trachea (rare) and esophagus (more common), lung parenchyma, sympathetic ganglia, lym-
                   phatic duct (on the left), and brachial plexus. Once the spine is exposed and the discs and/or vertebrae are removed,
                   the spinal cord is at risk. This procedure occasionally involves entering the thoracic cavity, in which case it is usually
                   done intrapleurally—that is, through the parietal pleura. The lung needs to be collapsed at least partially. Spinal cord
                   monitoring is usually performed; wake-up tests are not. Manipulation of the carotid artery and aortic arch may cause
                   wide HR and BP fluctuations.
                   Transthoracic approach: Further down the spine, the levels from T5-T10 are more easily reached via a transtho-
                   racic approach (Fig. 10.3-1). This involves a typical thoracotomy with the resection of a rib. The level of the rib resec-
                   tion is usually 1–2 levels above the highest vertebral level being approached. The great vessels and lung parenchyma
                   are at risk, as is the thoracic duct (on the left). The patient is in the lateral decubitus position, and the mediastinum
                   and heart usually fall to the opposite side, out of harm’s way. Risk to the spinal cord depends on the difficulty and
                   extent of the vertebral disease and the reconstruction. Spinal cord monitoring usually is performed intraop. The need
                   for the lung to be deflated varies with the extent of the exposure. In centers where this procedure is frequently per-
                   formed and the surgeons are accustomed to the respiratory motion during operation, DLTs are not routinely used.
                   Because there is no (intended) violation of the lung parenchyma, air leaks and parenchymal repairs are not common.
                   Transdiaphragmatic approach: When the exposure must transverse the diaphragm, a combined retroperitoneal
                   and transthoracic approach is used. This requires the diaphragm to be sectioned circumferentially from the chest wall
                   and spine. If only the very low segments of the thoracic spine (T10-T12) are exposed, the required deflation of the
                   involved lung is minimal. The risks are the same as those encountered with the transthoracic or retroperitoneal ap-
                   proaches alone. Regardless of the level of exposure, the operating table may be used during the procedure to manipu-
                   late the spine for better exposure and to “lock in” implants, bone grafts, etc. Usually, the area of the spine to be exposed
                   is centered above the “breaking” joint and kidney rests of the table (Fig. 10.3-2). After the initial exposure, the table is

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery

                               Figure 10.3-1. Surgical anatomy of the transthoracic approach. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics. JB
                               Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1984.)

===== PAGE 990 =====
990   c h a p t e r 10.3   Spine Surgery

                                               Figure 10.3-2. Patient position for transdiaphragmatic or retroperitoneal approach.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in
                                               Orthopaedics. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1984.)

                                   angled in the center with the head and legs pointing down and kidney rests elevated to “open up” the section of spine
                                   facing the surgeon. After removal of the disk, abscess, or tumor, a reconstruction—using bone graft, metal implants,
                                   bone cement, or a combination of these—is performed. In some cases, the operating table is straightened and, with the
                                   spine in neutral alignment, the stability of the reconstruction is tested.
                                   The morbidity of these procedures depends primarily on the nature of the underlying disease. Obviously, bleeding
                                   and visceral injury are more likely when debriding a grapefruit-sized Potts abscess with several destroyed vertebrae
                                   than in removing a degenerated lumbar disk for fusion.
                                   In some instances, the anterior procedure may be followed with a posterior fusion, either immediately or after
                                   5–7 d of convalescence. If done immediately after, the patient needs to be placed in the prone position, and the
                                   second procedure needs to be done through a midline exposure. Sometimes anterior and posterior surgeries are
                                    performed simultaneously by two surgical teams. The most common reason for a staged anterior/posterior proce-
                                    dure (in the United States) is scoliosis; however, fractures at the thoracolumbar junction, after anterior decompres-
                                    sion and reconstruction, are often instrumented and fused posteriorly.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fractures (usually at thoracic lumbar junction); idiopathic scoliosis; primary neoplasm or
                                   metastatic disease to the spine; pyogenic or TB osteomyelitis of the spine; Scheuermann’s kyphosis

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                                Transdiaphragmatic
                                                            Cervicothoracic Approach          Transthoracic Approach            Approach

                                    Position                Supine; towel roll placed be-     Lateral decubitus (Fig. 10.3-     ⇐
                                                            tween shoulder blades, head       2); intended segments over
                                                            slightly extended and turned      the table break and kidney
                                                            away from operated side           rests; axillary roll

                                    Incision                Inverted “L” longitudinally       Along a rib, two levels above     ⇐
                                                            along manubrium to sternal        the highest segment to be
                                                            notch, then transversely          exposed
                                                            above clavicle

                                    Special                 Instrumentation rarely used.      For thoracolumbar scoliosis,      ⇐ (More common to use in-
                                      instrumentation       Strut grafts—using rib, fibula,   a Zielke-type rod and screws      strumentation at the affected
                                                            clavicle or cement—may be         may be used; more rigid           level than above.)
                                                            used to replace excised ver-      instrumentation sometimes
                                                            tebrae. ± DLT                     used in fractures. ± DLT

                                    Unique                  Aortic arch and carotid ma-       During spinal reconstruction,     ⇐
                                      considerations        nipulation may cause BP/HR        manipulation of operating table
                                                            changes. Postop respiratory       may be essential to “lock in”
                                                            distress well described.          graft or implant (see above).

===== PAGE 991 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Thoracic and Thoracolumbar Spine                         991

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                                      Transdiaphragmatic
                                              Cervicothoracic Approach            Transthoracic Approach              Approach

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv (+ gentamicin      ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              80 mg iv, if indwelling bladder
                                              catheter)

                     Surgical time            2–6 h                               ⇐                                   ⇐

                     Closing                  Patient usually transferred         ⇐                                   ⇐
                       considerations         to bed prior to emergence;
                                              sudden jerking motions may
                                              dislodge graft or implant.

                     EBL                      200–5000 mL. Blood loss is          ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              extremely variable; when bleed-
                                              ing occurs, it may be torrential
                                              from the aorta, vena cava, or
                                              iliac vessels and branches. In
                                              nontumor or infection cases,
                                              200–400 mL is usual.

                     Postop care              Chest drain; NG suction usu-        ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              ally needed; short period of
                                              ICU observation is usual.

                     Mortality                < 0.1%, except in cases of          ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              malignancy or sepsis

                     Morbidity                For elective degenerative           ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              cases: 5–10% overall
                                                DVT: 6%                           ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                Neurological: 3%                  ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                Infection: 1%                     ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                Sexual dysfunction                ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              For sepsis or tumor: 50–80%         ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              (overall)

                                                                                                                                                                 Orthopedic Surgery
                                                Cardiorespiratory failure         ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                Sepsis                            ⇐                                   ⇐

                     Pain score               7–8 (if patient sensate at          7–8 (if patient sensate at          7–8 (if patient sensate at
                                              level of surgery)                   level of surgery)                   level of surgery)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                12–30 yr (scoliosis surgery); > 40 (tumor and infection surgery); 15–35 yr (fractures)

                     Male:Female              1:1, except more scoliosis surgery in females (1:4) and more fractures in males

                     Incidence                20,000/yr

                     Etiology                 Scoliosis: idiopathic (50%), neuromuscular (15%), congenital (5%); trauma (20%); infections, tumors (10%)

                     Associated               Pulmonary HTN and impaired pulmonary function; neuromuscular scoliosis (poliomyelitis, CP,
                       conditions             muscular dystrophy, Friedreich’s ataxia); aspiration; cardiomyopathy

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion, p. 997.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Butler J, Schafer MF: Anterior approach to scoliosis. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 4011–30.
                     2. Chrastil J, Patel AA: Complications associated with posterior and transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. J Am Acad Orthop
                        Surg 2012; 20(5):283–91.

===== PAGE 992 =====
992   c h a p t e r 10.3     Spine Surgery

                                     3. Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics: An Anatomic Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1994, 215–302.
                                     4. Jain AK: Treatment of tuberculosis of the spine with neurologic complications. Clin Orthop 2002; 398:75–84.
                                     5. McLain RF, Benson DR: Operative treatment of thoracic and thoracolumbar fractures. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s
                                        Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 3725–45.
                                     6. McLain RF, Lieberman I: Surgical treatment of adult scoliosis. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd
                                        edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 4101–14.
                                     7. Taft E, Francis R: Evaluation and management of scoliosis. J Pediatr Health Care 2003; 17(1):42–4.
                                     8. Tay BK, Deckey J, Hu SS: Spinal infections. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2002; 10(3):188–97.
                                     9. Yeo JM, Vertinsky AT, Chew JB, et al: Imaging in adult scoliosis: preoperative assessment and postoperative complications.
                                        Semin Musculoskeletal Radiol 2011; 15(2):143–50.

                                   SPINAL RECONSTRUCTION AND FUSION—
                                   LUMBOSACRAL SPINE
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The same general considerations apply here as in thoracolumbar reconstruction segments. The thoracic
                                   cavity is not entered, nor is the diaphragm sectioned. Careful preop assessment is needed, as these patients may have
                                   a wide range of coexisting diseases. The same operative procedure is performed for removal of a degenerative disk in a
                                   healthy patient as is carried out to decompress the cauda equina in a debilitated patient with metastatic breast carcinoma.
                                   Retroperitoneal approach: Below the diaphragm, exposure of the lumbar spine (L2-S1) can be performed through
                                   a retroperitoneal approach (Fig. 10.3-3). This often involves a flank incision, often with resection of the 11th or 12th
                                   rib. The patient lies in a decubitus or partial decubitus position. At risk here are the great vessels above and below
                                   the bifurcation of the aorta (L4-L5). The ureter crosses the operative field and must be identified and protected. The
                                   sympathetic chain may be damaged along the vertebrae, but the consequences of this are minimal. The presacral
                                   plexus further down may be injured and result in persistent retrograde ejaculation.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                             Figure 10.3-3. Retroperitoneal approach to lumbar spine. (Reproduced with
                                             permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics. JB
                                             Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1984.)

===== PAGE 993 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Lumbosacral Spine               993

                   A Pfannenstiel’s incision may be used to approach L5/S1 or L4/5. Regardless of the level of exposure, the operating
                   table is used during the procedure to manipulate the spine for better exposure and to “lock in” implants, bone grafts,
                   etc. Usually the area of the spine to be exposed is centered above the ‘breaking’ joint and kidney rests of the table
                   (Fig. 10.3-2). After initial exposure, the table is angled in the center with the head and legs pointing down and the
                   kidney rests elevated to open up the section of spine facing the surgeon. After the removal of the disc, abscess, or
                   tumor, a reconstruction—using bone graft, metal implants, bone cement, or a combination of these—is performed.
                   The table is then straightened; with the spine in neutral alignment, the stability of the reconstruction is tested by this
                   maneuver, which may need to be repeated several times.
                   In some instances, the anterior reconstruction and fusion is followed with a posterior fusion, either immediately or
                   after 5–7 d of convalescence. If done immediately after, the patient needs to be positioned prone on the operating
                   table and the second procedure done through a midline exposure. Sometimes anterior and posterior surgeries can be
                   performed simultaneously by two surgical teams. The most common reason for a staged anterior/posterior proce-
                   dure (in the United States) was scoliosis. Recent trends in degenerative lumbar disk surgery indicate that anterior and
                   posterior fusion has become more common with some evidence suggesting better results in fusion and pain relief.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: When the L5 vertebra and sacrum need to be exposed widely, a transperito-
                   neal approach may be needed. This involves a laparotomy or Pfannenstiel’s incision, displacement of the bowels out
                   of the pelvis, and exposure of the lumbosacral junction (Fig. 10.3-4). The patient is supine for this procedure, and the
                   surgical risks are similar, as with other intraabdominal approaches.

                                                                                                                            L5
                                                                                                                            vertebral
                                                                                                                            body

                                                                                                                                                       Orthopedic Surgery

                               Figure 10.3-4. Transperitoneal approach to lumbosacral junction. (Reproduced
                               with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics. JB
                               Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1984.)

===== PAGE 994 =====
994   c h a p t e r 10.3   Spine Surgery

                                   In a recent modification to the retroperitoneal approach, the patient is placed in the supine position. In this supine
                                   retroperitoneal approach, an incision is made in either a longitudinal or transverse fashion between the umbilicus
                                   and the pubis. The rectus abdominus fascia is incised and the rectus abdominus is retracted medially or laterally,
                                   allowing access to the retroperitoneal space without violating the peritoneal cavity. The advantage of this approach
                                   over the transperitoneal approach includes decreased need for bowel manipulation, → ↓ 3rd-space loss of fluid and
                                   ↓ heat loss.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Degenerative disc disease; segmental instability; vertebral fractures requiring decompres-
                                   sion; vertebral osteomyelitis or tuberculosis; neoplastic disease of the lumbar spine

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Retroperitoneal Approach (Lateral)                                  Transperitoneal Approach

                                    Position                Lateral decubitus, affected side up. The up hip and knee            Supine
                                                            are flexed to relax psoas muscle and allow its reflection to
                                                            expose the lumbar vertebral bodies.

                                    Incision                Flank incision curving anteriorly to the lateral margin of the      Pfannenstiel’s above the pubis
                                                            rectus abdominus (Fig. 10.3-3)

                                    Special                 Occasional use of anterior instrumentation to stabilize fractures   ⇐
                                      instrumentation       or to reconstruct the spine when entire vertebrae are removed

                                    Unique                  In performing spinal reconstruction, manipulation of operat-        ⇐ + A general bowel prep usually
                                      considerations        ing table is essential to “lock in” graft or implant (see above).   is performed preop.

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv (+ gentamicin 80 mg iv, if indwelling blad-        ⇐
                                                            der catheter already in place); exception is when infection
                                                            is suspected and specific cultures are obtained intraop.

                                    Surgical time           3–6 h                                                               ⇐

                                    Closing                 The spine may be more or less stable after reconstruction,          ⇐
                                      considerations        and patient usually transferred to bed prior to being awakened.
                                                            Sudden jerking motions, etc., may dislodge graft or implant.

                                    EBL                     200–5000 mL. Blood loss extremely variable. When bleed-             ⇐
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                            ing occurs, it may be torrential from the aorta, vena cava,
                                                            or iliac vessels and branches. In nontumor/infection cases,
                                                            200–400 mL is usual.

                                    Postop care             Patients with degenerative conditions and elective surgeries        ⇐
                                                            normally recover in PACU and return to ward. Patients with
                                                            infections, fractures, and tumors are usually observed in
                                                            ICU for 24 h postop. Ileus for 24–72 h is usual; NG suction
                                                            usually continues until bowel sounds and passing flatus are
                                                            present. Generally, mobilization depends on final stability.

                                    Mortality               Malignancy or sepsis: 1–2%                                          ⇐
                                                            Elective: < 0.1%                                                    ⇐

                                    Morbidity               In patients with malignancy, sepsis or fractures with cauda         ⇐
                                                            equina compression, overall serious complications: 25–50%
                                                               Cardiopulmonary failure                                          ⇐
                                                               Neurologic deficit                                               –
                                                               Pneumothorax                                                     –
                                                               Sepsis                                                           ⇐

                                    Pain score              6                                                                   6

===== PAGE 995 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Cervical Spine         995

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Variable (infant–adult)

                     Male:Female             1:1, except more scoliosis surgery in females (1:4)

                     Incidence               Uncommon

                     Etiology                Infection (osteomyelitis, TB); trauma; congenital; neoplasia; idiopathic

                   Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Cervical Spine
                         Surgical Considerations
                   Description: Both an anterior or posterior approach can be used to decompress nerve roots (radiculopathy) and
                   the spinal cord (myelopathy). Generally, involvement of one- or two-level pathology is best accomplished through
                   an anterior approach, whereas the posterior approach may better serve multilevel pathology. An anterior approach
                   is also preferred when the cervical spine has lost its normal lordotic contour. Posterior pathology, such as unilateral
                   foraminal disc herniations, and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) often dictate a posterior
                   approach. Complex pathology may necessitate combined approaches.
                   Anterior approach: This is done under GA. The patient is positioned supine on the operating table and a roll is
                   placed between the scapulae to facilitate a neutral to slightly extended neck position. The arms are tucked in at
                   the side, and gentle traction of the upper extremities may be applied to provide visualization of C7 using intraop
                   fluoroscopy. Surface landmarks and fluoroscopy are used to locate the intended level. A transverse incision can
                   be used up to four-level discectomies, whereas a longitudinal incision can be utilized for more levels. Generally a
                   left-sided approach is preferred to minimize recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) injury, but more recent data suggest
                   no difference between a right- versus left-sided approach. After skin incision, the platysma muscle layer is exposed
                   and divided either longitudinally or in line with the incision. A plane deep to the platysma is developed, and the
                   medial border of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle is identified. Blunt dissection is initiated between the

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                   identified medial border of the SCM and the strap muscles. While staying medial to the carotid sheath, the trachea
                   and esophagus are retracted to the contralateral side, and the dissection is carried deep to expose the spine. The
                   desired disc levels are identified using fluoroscopy. The longus colli muscle is identified and elevated carefully sub-
                   periosteally on either side to facilitate the insertion of deep-bladed, self-retaining retractors. Some data indicates
                   that deflation of the endotracheal tube cuff with adjustments of the retractor may reduce the incidence of RLN and
                   esophageal injury. Complete removal of the disc, other compressive pathology, or full versus complete corpectomy
                   can be performed with the aid of curettes and a high-speed burr. Appropriately sized grafts are inserted and fur-
                   ther stabilized with the aid of a plate and screws. The operative time for a single-level is generally between 1 and
                   2 h, and the wound is typically closed over a drain to avoid a compression hematoma causing airway compromise.
                   Cases involving three or more levels are at high risk for excessive soft-tissue swelling and airway obstruction, and
                   continued intubation may be a strong consideration.
                   Posterior approach: The patient is placed under GA in the supine position. Prior to turning the patient prone, a
                   head holder (Mayfield versus Gardner-Wells) is applied, and the surgeon generally controls the head while the anes-
                   thesiologist controls the airway in the process of log-rolling. As with the anterior approach, the arms are tucked in
                   at the side, and gentle traction is applied for visualization of the entire cervical spine with fluoroscopy. The hips and
                   knees are gently flexed in a sling while the remainder of the body is supported by bolsters allowing the abdomen to
                   hang free on an open frame (Jackson) operating table. A reverse Trendelenburg position further aids in distribution
                   of blood into the abdomen and legs. An extensive exposure can be created from the greater occipital protuberance
                   to the thoracic spine. Dissection is carried down sharply through subcutaneous tissue and fat to the trapezius fascia
                   with care taken to stay in the midline. A dry surgical dissection with electrocautery can be achieved in this manner
                   as the ligamentum nuchae is relatively avascular. Subperiosteal dissection is then carried from the tip of the spinous
                   processes over the laminae elevating the paraspinal muscles as a cuff. Depending on the intended surgery, procedures
                   such as laminoforaminotomies, laminotomies, and laminectomies can be performed. Blood loss may be significant
                   depending on the length of surgery as well as the extent of bony resection.

===== PAGE 996 =====
996   c h a p t e r 10.3      Spine Surgery

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cervical radiculopathy, cervical myelopathy, spinal cord syndromes secondary to trauma

                                    ■■ Summary of Procedures
                                                               Anterior                                                            Posterior

                                    Position                   Supine, roll between scapulae,                                      Prone, Jackson table, head h older,
                                                               tuck arms at sides with gentle traction                             Gardner-Wells Tongs/Mayfield
                                                                                                                                   head holder, tuck arms at sides
                                                                                                                                   with gentle traction

                                    Incision                   Transverse versus longitudinal depending on number                  Longitudinal
                                                               of levels

                                    Special                     Microscope; light source; fluoroscopy; specialized                 ⇐
                                    instrumentation            r etractors and dissection instruments for working in a
                                                                small, deep incision

                                    Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g iv                                                    Cefazolin 1 g iv ± Gentamicin
                                                                                                                                   usually 80 mg iv

                                    Surgical time              1.0–2.0 h/level                                                     2–5 h

                                    Closing                    Minimal suturing over a drain                                       Several layer closure over a drain
                                    considerations

                                    EBL                        Minimal                                                             Wide range

                                    Postop care                PACU, mobilization as soon as tolerated. Multilevel                 ⇐
                                                                rocedures may require continued intubation postop
                                                               p

                                    Mortality                  Very rare                                                           ⇐

                                    Morbidity                  Dysphagia                                                           Nerve injury
                                                               Nerve injury                                                        Dural laceration
                                                               Dural laceration                                                    Vertebral artery injury
                                                               Vertebral artery injury                                             Infection
                                                               Esophageal injury                                                   Air embolus
                                                               Airway obstruction
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                               Dysphonia
                                                               Horner’s syndrome

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Audu P, Artz G, Scheid S, et al: Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy after anterior cervical spine surgery: the impact of endotracheal
                                        tube cuff deflation, reinflation, and pressure adjustment. Anesthesiology 2006; 105(5):898–901.
                                     2. Beutler WJ, Sweeney CA, Connolly PJ: Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury with anterior cervical spine surgery risk with
                                        laterality of surgical approach. Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2001; 26(12):1337–42.
                                     3. Emery SE, Bohlman HH, Bolesta MJ, Jones PK: Anterior cervical decompression and arthrodesis for the treatment of cervical
                                        spondylotic myelopathy. Two to seventeen-year follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1998; 80(7):941–51.
                                     4. Fountas KN, Kapsalaki EZ, Nikolakakos LG, et al: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion associated complications. Spine
                                        (Phila PA 1976) 2007; 32(21):2310–7.
                                     5. Gregorius FK, Estrin T, Crandall PH: Cervical spondylotic radiculopathy and myelopathy. A long-term follow-up study. Arch
                                        Neurol 1976; 33(9):618–25.
                                     6. Herkowitz HN: A comparison of anterior cervical fusion, cervical laminectomy, and cervical laminoplasty for the surgical
                                        management of multiple level spondylotic radiculopathy. Spine (Phila PA 1976) 1988; 13(7):774–80.
                                     7. Hukuda S, Mochizuki T, Ogata M, Shichikawa K, Shimomura Y: Operations for cervical spondylotic myelopathy. A comparison
                                        of the results of anterior and posterior procedures. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1985; 67(4):609–15.
                                     8. Jung A, Schramm J, Lehnerdt K, Herberhold C: Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy during anterior cervical spine surgery: a
                                        prospective study. J Neurosurg Spine 2005; 2(2):123–7.
                                     9. Smith GW, Robinson RA: The treatment of certain cervical-spine disorders by anterior removal of the intervertebral disc and
                                        interbody fusion. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1958; 40-A(3):607–24.

===== PAGE 997 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Cervical Spine        997

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR SPINAL
                         RECONSTRUCTION AND FUSION
                   (Procedures covered: anterior reconstruction and fusion of thoracic, thoracolumbar, and lumbosacral
                   spine)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for spinal reconstruction commonly have either
                   idiopathic or acquired scoliosis, a complex deformity involving both
                   lateral curvature and rotation of the spine, as well as an associated
                   deformity of the rib cage → ↓ pulmonary function. Types of scoliosis
                   include idiopathic, congenital, neuromuscular, myopathic, traumatic,
                   tumor-related, and mesenchymal disorders. The majority of cases
                   are idiopathic, with a male:female ratio of 1:4. Normally, the cervi-
                   cal spine and lumbar spine are lordotic, whereas the thoracic spine is
                   kyphotic. The instrumentation is intended to stabilize the spine until
                   bony fusion of the spine has occurred. After the fusion is solid
                   (6–12 mo), the instrumentation may be removed if it is broken, causes
                   protrusions or lumps in the back, or the patient is having residual
                   back pain. Nonscoliotic patients presenting for this surgery may have
                   spinal instability as a result of trauma, metastatic cancer, or infec-
                   tion (e.g., TB). These patients are usually healthy, apart from their
                   underlying pathology. The patients with m  etastatic cancer may need
                   a careful workup with regard to respiratory, nutritional, and chemo-
                   therapeutic status. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Lobectomy,
                   Pneumonectomy, p. 285, or Mastectomy, p. 666.)

                                                                                                       Figure 10.3-5. Cobb angle.

                                            Respiratory impairment proportional to angle of lateral curvature (Cobb angle; Fig.

                                                                                                                                               Orthopedic Surgery
                    Respiratory
                                            10.3-5)
                                              Cobb Angle:           30°–60°                 60°– 90°             > 90°

                                              VC                    ↓ 25%                   ↓ 50%                ↓ 70%
                                              TLC                   ↓ 27%                   ↓ 37%                ↓ 50%

                                            Restrictive pattern: ↓ TLC + ↓ ↓ VC
                                            • If VC > 70% predicted, respiratory reserve is adequate.
                                            • If VC < 40% predicted, postop ventilation usually is required.
                                            Expect further significant (~40%) ↓ VC immediately postop, requiring 7–10 d to resolve.
                                            ↑ RR + ↓ TV → ↑ dead space + ↓ alveolar ventilation → V/Q mismatch → hypoxemia.
                                            Patients with scoliosis of neuromuscular origin are more susceptible to aspiration and
                                            respiratory failure.
                                             Tests: CXR; ABG; PFT; assess exercise tolerance by Hx.

                    Cardiovascular          ↑ PVR (NB: independent of severity of scoliosis). High incidence of CHD and mitral valve
                                            prolapse.
                                            Tests: ECG; ECHO—consult cardiologist if apical systolic murmur or other evidence of
                                            cardiovascular impairment is present.

                    Neurological            SSEPs (posterior cord) and MEPs (anterior cord) will be monitored in most patients
                                            who are undergoing spinal reconstruction. Some surgeons, however, may request
                                            that the patient be awakened intraop, after completion of the instrumentation, but be-
                                            fore closure of the wound, to ensure that no motor deficits have developed as a result of
                                            the correction. If an intraoperative wake-up test is planned, explain to the patient what

===== PAGE 998 =====
998   c h a p t e r 10.3    Spine Surgery

                                   Neurological               the procedure entails, why it is necessary, and what to expect. Reassure the patient that
                                     (cont’d)                 the test will be brief, pain will be controlled, and that you will be there to keep them
                                                              safe and as comfortable as possible. If preop focal neurological lesions exist, they should
                                                              be documented to distinguish them from changes associated with the surgical correction.

                                   Musculoskeletal            When the Cobb angle is > 25°, the degree of respiratory impairment will be significant,
                                                              and the need for postop ventilatory support becomes more likely. Patients with muscu-
                                                              lar dystrophy may be more sensitive to myocardial depression from anesthetic agents and
                                                              also may require postop ventilation 2° muscle weakness. Succinylcholine may cause severe
                                                              rhabdomyolysis with hyperkalemia. These patients also may be at risk for MH.

                                   Hematologic                Avoid use of platelet inhibitors 2 wk before surgery. Have at least 2 U PRBCs available in
                                                              the room at the start of the operation. Consider use of a red cell salvage device. Discuss
                                                              use of controlled ↓ BP with surgeon. If anticipated blood loss is substantial and the pa-
                                                              tient is not anemic, consider encouraging autologous blood donation (time permitting)
                                                              or performing isovolemic hemodilution intraop. Be aware that patients with previously
                                                              placed spinal support (e.g., Milwaukee brace) for correction of scoliosis may have more
                                                              blood loss than usual.

                                   Laboratory                 ✓ INR, PT, PTT, and Plt count preop. ✓ Hct the morning of operation or after induction
                                                              of anesthesia if autologous donations have been made because, with modest blood loss and
                                                              fluid therapy, the Hct may rapidly ↓ to < 26%.

                                   Premedication              Standard premedication (see p. B-1), if appropriate. Long-acting benzodiazepines may in-
                                                              terfere with wake-up testing.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. For pediatric cases, preheat room to 78°F. For operations in the prone position, use a
                                   wire-reinforced tube to prevent kinking and airway obstruction. If a transthoracic approach is used, lung isolation will
                                   be necessary. Double-lumen tubes provide the best method of achieving lung isolation overall and are available as small
                                   as 28 Fr (OD = 9.3 mm), which is typically suitable for children as young as 12 yrs. If a wake-up test is required, consider
                                   the use of an endotracheal tube designed to allow laryngotracheal instillation of topical anesthetic (LITA® tube).
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Induction                  Standard induction (p. B-2). Assuming MEP monitoring will be used, consider succinyl-
                                                              choline vs. low dose rocuronium (0.5 mg/kg) vs. deep anesthesia and remifentanil bolus
                                                              (1.5 mcg/kg) to facilitate intubation.

                                   Maintenance                Neuromuscular blockers will completely abolish MEPs and must be avoided when using
                                                              this monitoring technique. Normal doses of volatile anesthetics interfere with MEP and,
                                                              to a lesser extent, SSEP monitoring. When monitoring MEPs, TIVA may be requested (see
                                                              p. B-3). When monitoring SSEPs only, a continuous infusion of a narcotic (ideally remifen-
                                                              tanil) together with a reduced dose of inhaled anesthetic (0.5–1 MAC) and neuromuscular
                                                              blockade usually produces satisfactory monitoring conditions. A BIS-type monitor may
                                                              help with the timing of a wake-up test. The neurophysiology monitoring team must be up-
                                                              dated if conditions that affect the evoked potentials change (depth of anesthesia, anesthetic
                                                              agent, blood pressure, PCO2, PO2).

                                   Emergence                  As soon as neuromonitoring is complete, switching to an inhaled anesthetic and stopping
                                                              the propofol will allow for a timely emergence. Some surgeons may place an epidural
                                                              catheter before closure for postop pain management or perform intercostal local anes-
                                                              thetic injections for the transthoracic approach. Prior to emergence, scoliosis patients
                                                              may be fitted with a plaster mold to be used as a brace that will be worn several mo po-
                                                              stop. Transfer from the operating table to bed must be smooth and gentle. The patient
                                                              is typically extubated following transfer to the bed. Keep in mind that remifentanil will
                                                              not provide postop analgesia and that another longer acting opioid must be administered
                                                              before emergence.

===== PAGE 999 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Cervical Spine           999

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 14–16 ga × 2                           Anticipate substantial blood loss (proportional
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h not to                 to the number of levels) from extensive dissection
                                       exceed 40 mL/kg                            of muscles from bony spine; less so with isolated
                                                                                  thoracic fusion. It may vary from 25–100% of the
                                                                                  patient’s blood volume, although blood loss is
                                                                                  usually less with the anterior approach (Dwyer’s).
                                       Hetastarch 6% ≤ 20 mL/kg or albu-          Colloid is preferred because it will remain intra-
                                       min 5% prn                                 vascular until metabolized.
                                       Warm all fluids.
                                       Humidify gases.                            Low-volume units (e.g., Medtronic, AutoLog) are
                                       T&C 2–4 U PRBCs.                           best.
                                       ± Red cell salvage

                    Control of blood   Position to prevent venous                  Although of questionable benefit, some sur-
                      loss             engorgement.                                geons may request deliberate hypotension.
                                       ↓ MAP to 60–70 mm Hg                       Decreasing MAP ≤ 20% below the lowest preop
                                       ± ↓ Hct to 25–28% (isovolemic               values may ↓ blood loss. Generally maintain
                                       hemodilution)                              MAP > 60 mm Hg in young, healthy patients,
                                                                                  and > 85 mm Hg in older patients, for spinal
                                                                                  cord perfusion. Once dissection is complete,
                                                                                  higher BP values acceptable. Maintain UO at
                                                                                  0.5–1 mL/kg/h during controlled hypotension.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (p. B-1)                 CVP monitor helpful for continuous infusions
                                       Arterial line                              and to assess fluid Rx. Trends in CVP may be
                                       CVP line                                   more reliable than measurement of UO to assess
                                       Urinary catheter                           changes in volume status in patients in the prone
                                       SSEP, MEP, ± BIS                           and lateral positions. Frequent labs (ABG, lytes,
                                                                                  coag) may be useful.

                    Positioning        ✓ and pad pressure points                   Prone: Place head on cushioned head holder
                                       ✓ eyes, neck                                with cutout for eyes, nose, chin. Make certain
                                       Bite Block (essential for MEP)              that none of the face rests on bed. ✓ elbows,
                                       Avoid posterior pressure on ETT             knees, feet.

                                                                                                                                              Orthopedic Surgery
                                                                                   Lateral: Place head on donut with C-spine in
                                                                                  neutral position. Pad and support both arms in
                                                                                   neutral position. Ensure no pressure on eyes or
                                                                                   ears.

                    Wake-up test       30 min advance warning from sur-           The wake-up test assesses integrity of motor
                                       geons is needed.                           pathways in the ventral cord. Uncontrolled pa-
                                       • Decrease anesthetic agents.             tient movement during wake-up test can result
                                       • Reverse muscle relaxants                 in accidental extubation or dislodgement of the
                                       • Target BIS in high 50s.                  spinal instrumentation. Unrestrained inspira-
                                       • About 10 min before testing, turn off   tory efforts may provoke venous air embolism.
                                          anesthetics.                            The anesthesiologist must be prepared to rapidly
                                       • ↓ remifentanil infusion to 0.05 mcg/    reanesthetize the patient.
                                          kg/min or less.
                                       • If a LITA tube was used, administer
                                          3–4 mL 1% lidocaine into the trachea.
                                       • Begin speaking to the patient.
                                       • Request movement of all four limbs
                                          sequentially.
                                       Dangers:
                                       Air embolus
                                       Dislodgement of spinal
                                          instrumentation
                                       Accidental extubation

===== PAGE 1000 =====
1000   c h a p t e r 10.3    Spine Surgery

                                    SSEP and MEPs              SSEP: Dorsal cord function only               SSEP and MEP are used routinely. Avoid chang-
                                                               MEPs: Ventral cord function                   es in anesthetic conditions (depth of a nesthesia,
                                                                                                             agents, MAP, PCO2, PO2). An increase in the
                                                                                                             latency (> 10%) or decrease in the amplitude
                                                                                                             (≥ 50%) usually indicates cord injury from hard-
                                                                                                             ware impingement, cord stretch or compression,
                                                                                                             or hypoperfusion. The surgeon and anesthe-
                                                                                                             siologist should be notified immediately if the
                                                                                                             evoked potentials change. Unilateral changes to
                                                                                                             MEP/SSEP signals may indicate a positioning
                                                                                                             problem.

                                    Complications              Spinal cord ischemia                          SSEP indications of spinal cord ischemia should
                                                               Massive blood loss                            be treated by alerting the surgeon and ensur-
                                                               Fat embolism                                  ing optimal perfusion (↑ BP, normalize PCO2,
                                                                                                             ↑ PO2, optimal Hct, ↓ PEEP, ↓ traction or pres-
                                                                                                             sure on the cord). Prompt transfusion may be
                                                                                                             necessary, and blood should be available in the
                                                                                                             room. Be prepared for the possibility of massive
                                                                                                             transfusion.

                                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                    Complications              Bleeding                                  Postop bleeding is common. Rarely, the bleeding
                                                                                                         occurs in a space that is not drained and can result
                                                                                                         in complications such as epidural hematoma or
                                                                                                         hemothorax.
                                                               Pulmonary insufficiency                   Postop ventilation may be required in patients with
                                                               Hypothermia                               severe respiratory impairment (see Preoperative
                                                               Pneumothorax                              Considerations, above). In addition, thoracotomy,
                                                               Dislodgement of internal fixation         surgical trauma to the diaphragm, fat embolism,
                                                                                                         and inadequate analgesia may further ↑ the risk of
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                         postop pulmonary insufficiency. Careful handling
                                                                                                         of patient in transfer is mandatory.
                                                               Neurologic sequelae16                     Neurologic sequelae probably remain the most
                                                                                                         feared complication, and it is important to docu-
                                                                                                         ment postop neurologic exam.

                                    Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                            Pain is a significant problem for postop scoliosis
                                      management               Intrathecal morphine 0.1–0.25 mg        patients. Most need analgesia × 3–4 d. Preop con-
                                                               by surgeon intraop                      sultation with patient (and parents) about different
                                                                                                       pain management techniques is important.
                                                               Thoracic/lumbar epidural opiates/ See p. C-2.
                                                               local anesthetics
                                                               iv acetaminophen, 1 g q 6 h for adults,
                                                               15 mg/kg q 6 h if ≤ 50 kg or ≤ 12.

                                    Tests                      CXR; ABG; Hct                             ✓ for pneumothorax and line placement.

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Adamus M, Hrabalek L, Wanek T, Gabrhelik T, Zapletalova J: Intraoperative reversal of neuromuscular block with sugammadex
                                         or neostigmine during extreme lateral interbody fusion, a novel technique for spine surgery. J Anesth 2011; 25(5):716–20.
                                      2. Arnold PM, Anderson KK, McGuire RA Jr: The lateral transpsoas approach to the lumbar and thoracic spine. A review. Surg
                                         Neurol Int 2012; 3(Suppl 3):S198–215.
                                      3. Buvanendran A, Thillainathan V: Preoperative and postoperative anesthetic and analgesic techniques for minimally invasive
                                         surgery of the spine. Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2010; 35(26 Suppl):S274–80.

===== PAGE 1001 =====
Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion—Cervical Spine                  1001

                     4. Chapman MW: Operative Orthopaedics, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1993, 4017–73.
                     5. Colovic V, Walker RW, Patel D, et al: Reduction of blood loss using aprotonin during spinal surgery in children for non-
                        idiopathic scoliosis. Paediatr Anaesth 2002; 12(9):835.
                     6. Fritzell P, Hagg O, Wessberg P, et al: Chronic low back pain and fusion: a comparison of three surgical techniques: a prospective
                        multicenter randomized study from the Swedish Lumbar Spine Study Group. Spine 2002; 27(11):1131–41.
                     7. Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic Approach, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1994, 215–302.
                     8. McGirt MJ, Ambrossi GL, Datoo G, et al: Recurrent disc herniation and long-term back pain after primary lumbar discectomy:
                        review of outcomes reported for limited versus aggressive disc removal. Neurosurgery 2009; 64(2):338–44; discussion
                        344–5.
                     9. Mendiratta A, Emerson RG: Neurophysiologic intraoperative monitoring of scoliosis surgery. J Clin Neurophysiol 2009;
                        26(2):62–9.
                    10. Morrissy RT: Atlas of Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1992, 75–97.
                    11. O’Brien T, Akmakjian J, Ogin G, et al: Comparison of one-stage versus two-stage anterior/posterior spinal fusion for
                        neuromuscular scoliosis. J Pediatr Orthop 1992; 12(5):610–15.
                    12. Ozgur BM, Aryan HE, Pimenta L, Taylor WR: Extreme Lateral Interbody Fusion (XLIF): a novel surgical technique for
                        anterior lumbar interbody fusion. Spine J 2006; 6(4):435–43.
                    13. Paul JE, Ling E, Lalonde C, Thabane L: Deliberate hypotension in orthopedic surgery reduces blood loss and transfusion
                        requirements: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Can J Anesth 2007; 54(10):799–810.
                    14. Perez-Cruet MJ, Fessler RG, Perin NI: Review: complications of minimally invasive spinal surgery. Neurosurgery 2002;
                        51(5 Suppl):26–36.
                    15. Rodgers WB, Gerber EJ, Patterson J: Intraoperative and early postoperative complications in extreme lateral interbody fusion:
                        an analysis of 600 cases. Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2011; 36(1):26–32.
                    16. Schubert A, Deogaonkar A, Lotto M, Niezgoda J, Luciano M: Anesthesia for minimally invasive cranial and spinal surgery.
                        J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2006; 18(1):47–56.
                    17. Sloan TB, Heyer EJ: Anesthesia for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring of the spinal cord. J Clin Neurophysiol 2002;
                        19(5):430–43.
                    18. Slosar PJ: Indications and outcomes of reconstructive surgery in chronic pain of spinal origin. Spine 2002; 27(22):2555–63.
                    19. Soriano SG, McCann ME, Laussen PC: Neuroanesthesia. Innovative techniques and monitoring. Anesthesiol Clin North Am
                        2002; 20(1):137–51.
                    20. Sudhir KG, Smith RM, Hall J, et al: Intraoperative awakening for early recognition of possible neurologic sequelae during
                        Harrington-rod spinal fusion. Anesth Analg 1976; 55(4):526–8.
                    21. Tay BK, Deckey J, Hu SS: Spinal infections. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2002; 10(3):188–97.
                    22. Tohmeh AG, Rodgers WB, Peterson MD: Dynamically evoked, discrete-threshold electromyography in the extreme lateral
                        interbody fusion approach. J Neurosurg Spine 2011; 14(1):31–7.
                    23. Youssef JA, McAfee PC, Patty CA, et al: Minimally invasive surgery: lateral approach interbody fusion: results and review.
                        Spine (Phila PA 1976) 2010; 35(26 Suppl):S302–11.

                                                                                                                                                                    Orthopedic Surgery
                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Posterior Spinal Instrumentation & Fusion for Idiopathic Scoliosis:
                   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbQaT7z54E4
                   Scoliosis Spinal Fusion Animation: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WBIf4AQj5s0
                   Minimally Invasive Tubular Microdiscectomy: 3-D Video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cpkr_oy5Enc
                   Dr. Ali Bydon Performs a Minimally Invasive Lumbar Discectomy: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2j9QyiOxVF4

===== PAGE 1002 =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.4 Hip, Pelvis, Upper
                                           Leg Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           James I. Huddleston, MD
                                           Michael J. Bellino, MD
                                           Stuart B. Goodman, MD, PhD, FRCSC, FACS

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Frederick G. Mihm, MD
                                           Pedro P. Tanaka, MD

===== PAGE 1004 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of
                                    Pelvis or Acetabulum
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Pelvic fractures present several challenging treatment problems. Surgical management is complex and
                                    often difficult in nature. Specialized training and equipment are required for a successful outcome. Major trau-
                                    ma mechanisms produce pelvic-ring injuries, and patients with pelvic-ring disruptions frequently have associated
                                    systemic injuries, which may be life-threatening (e.g., hemorrhagic shock). Pelvic stabilization and surgical con-
                                    trol of hemorrhage may be performed acutely in the polytrauma patient who is hemodynamically unstable. This
                                    is in conjunction with an exploratory laparotomy performed by a trauma surgeon. The majority of patients with
                                    pelvic fractures who are treated operatively are taken to the OR on a delayed basis, after they have been stabi-
                                    lized. Pelvic fractures that do not heal are “nonunions,” whereas those that heal in an unsatisfactory position are
                                    “malunions.”
                                    Anterior approaches to the pelvis include Pfannenstiel’s and ilioinguinal incisions, which are utilized for reduc-
                                    tion and fixation of dislocations and fracture/dislocations of the symphysis pubis, fractures of the pubic rami, and
                                    access to the anterior aspect of the sacroiliac (SI) joint. Posterior approaches to the pelvis involve either vertical
                                    or curved incisions along the iliac crest and are used for reduction and fixation of SI joint dislocations, fracture/
                                    dislocations of the SI joint, and fractures of the iliac wing and of the sacrum. These procedures are often lengthy

                                                                             Superior ramus
                                                                                              Obturator membrane
                                                             Pubic symphysis

                                                                                                         Posterior superior
                                                                                                         iliac spine
                                                                                                              Posterior sacroiliac
                                                                  A                                           ligaments
                                                           Pubic tubercle                                            Interosseous
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                           Inferior ramus                                            sacroiliac
                                                                                                                     ligaments
                                                                                      B
                                                           Iliolumbar                                                Anterior sacroiliac
                                                           ligament                                                  ligaments

                                                                                                   Sacrospinous
                                                                                                   ligament
                                                           Posterior
                                                           sacroiliac
                                                                                                   Sacrotuberous
                                                           ligament
                                                                                                   ligament             lliolumbar
                                                                         C                                              ligament

                                                                        Lateral                                         Anterior
                                                                        lumbosacral                                     sacroiliac
                                                                        ligament                                        ligament

                                                                   Sacrospinous                                    Sacrotuberous
                                                                   ligament                                        ligament
                                                                                               D

                                              Figure 10.4-1. Schematic views of the pelvis with the principal ligamentous supports.
                                              A: Symphysis pubis fibrocartilage. B: Posterior SI ligaments. C: Posterior view. D:
                                              Anterior view. (Redrawn from Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, Vol 1,
                                              3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

                             1004

===== PAGE 1005 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of Pelvis or Acetabulum     1005

                                              A                                       B

                                              C                                       D

                                Figure 10.4-2. Schematic view of the principal pelvis injury patterns, as determined
                                by the vector of the provocative blow. A: Anteroposterior compression or external
                                rotation injury. B: Stable lateral compression or internal rotation injury. C: Unstable
                                lateral compression or internal rotation injury. D: Unstable vertical shear disruption.
                                (Redrawn from Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, Vol 1, 3rd edition.
                                Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

                   and are staged, requiring changes in patient position. Reductions are facilitated by neuromuscular paralysis. The
                   posterior approach requires a large operative field, which may prevent the use of an epidural catheter. In addition,
                   postop anticoagulation for DVT prophylaxis is used uniformly and may contraindicate the use of epidural cath-
                   eters. The goal of pelvic reconstruction is to restore the anatomy and stability of the pelvis, which will decrease
                   hemorrhage in the hemodynamically unstable patient, aid in mobilization of the multiply injured patient, and

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                   improve long-term function.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fractures of pelvis/acetabulum; nonunion/malunion of the pelvis/acetabulum

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine (anterior); prone (posterior)

                     Incision                Pfannenstiel’s, ilioinguinal (anterior); posterior, curving along iliac crest (posterior)

                     Special                 Radiolucent table; pelvic instruments and implants; Cell Saver; I.I.
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time           1–6 h (anterior); 3–6 h (posterior)

                     Closing                 May require neuromuscular relaxation to aid reduction and closure; postop radiograph
                       considerations

                     EBL                     ≥ 1000 mL

                     Postop care             Multiple-trauma patient → ICU; others → PACU

                     Mortality               10%+, dependent on extent of multiple trauma

                     Morbidity               Ileus: Common
                                             Neurologic injury: Common

===== PAGE 1006 =====
1006   c h a p t e r 10.4    Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity                Genitourinary injuries: Not uncommon
                                      (cont’d)                Failure of fixation: Rare
                                                              Infection: Rare
                                                              Malunion: Rare
                                                              Nonunion: Rare

                                     Pain score               9

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                                     Male:Female              5:1

                                     Incidence                1–2%

                                     Etiology                 Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents (60–80%); falls (10–15%); crush injuries (5%); other (5%)

                                     Associated               Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems, including head and neck, chest,
                                       conditions             abdomen, and extremities. These often will be addressed concurrently with pelvic or acetabular
                                                              fracture.

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Procedures about the Pelvis and Hip (p. 1015).

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Guyton JL: Fractures of hip, acetabulum, and pelvis. In: Canale ST, ed. Campbell’s Operative Orthopaedics, 10th edition.
                                         Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2003.
                                      2. LaVelle DG: Delayed union and nonunion of fractures. In: Canale ST, ed. Campbell’s Operative Orthopaedics, 10th edition.
                                         CV Mosby, St. Louis: 2003, 3125–65.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                      3. Leighton RK: Nonunions and malunions of the pelvis. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, Vol I, 3rd
                                         edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 921–34.
                                      4. Mears DC, Durbhakula SM: Fractures and dislocations of the pelvic ring. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic
                                         Surgery, Vol I, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 531–85.
                                      5. Prevezas N: Evolution of pelvic and acetabular surgery from ancient to modern times. Injury 2007; 38(4):397–409.
                                      6. Rice PL Jr, Rudolph M:. Pelvic fractures. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2007; 25(3):795–802.

                                    Closed Reduction and External Fixation
                                    of the Pelvis
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: This procedure entails manipulating the pelvis to obtain an acceptable reduction by closed means
                                    under GA, and then applying an anterior external fixation device to maintain the reduction. The pins for the exter-
                                    nal fixator are inserted into the iliac crest either percutaneously or through small incisions. During this procedure,
                                    either radiographs or the I.I. is used to confirm that an acceptable reduction has been obtained. In some centers, this
                                    procedure is done in the emergency department as a lifesaving procedure.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Displaced fracture of the pelvis; unstable fracture of the pelvis

===== PAGE 1007 =====
Closed Reduction and External Fixation of the Pelvis           1007

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Percutaneously or through small incisions along the iliac crest

                     Special                 External fixation; often performed on a radiolucent table using I.I.
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic); combi-
                                             nation antibiotics, if multiple severe, open fractures or other significant injuries are present.

                     Surgical time           1–1.5 h

                     EBL                     Negligible from surgical procedure; however, anticipate large blood losses (4+ U) from the pelvic
                                             fracture alone.

                     Postop care             Multiple-trauma victim → ICU; others → PACU

                     Mortality               10% or more, depending on extent of multiple trauma; 50% in open fractures

                     Morbidity               Ileus: Virtually 100%;
                                             Sacroiliac (SI) pain: 15–30%+
                                             Genitourinary problems, including bladder or urethral rupture: 13%
                                             Neurological deficit to lumbosacral plexus: 1–10%
                                             Malunion/severe deformity: 5%
                                             Leg-length discrepancy: 3–5%
                                             Impotence: 1–5%
                                             Residual instability: 1–3%
                                             Vascular complications: 1%
                                             Hypotension 2° to retroperitoneal hematoma: Common
                                             Respiratory distress: Common
                                             Gynecological and colorectal injuries: More common with open fractures/dislocations
                                             Delayed union, nonunion: Not uncommon
                                             Osteomyelitis: Rare
                                             Rupture of diaphragm: Rare

                     Pain score              7–10

                                                                                                                                                            Orthopedic Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                     Male:Female             5:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents (60–80%); falls (10–15%); crush injuries (5%); other (5%)

                     Associated              Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems, including head and neck, chest,
                       conditions            abdomen, and extremities. Patient sustaining a pelvic fracture also has a probability of having
                                             other injuries, including: musculoskeletal (85%); respiratory (60%); CNS (40%); GI (30%); urologic
                                             (12%); CVS (6%). These often will be addressed concurrently with the pelvic fracture.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Procedures about the Pelvis and Hip (p. 1015).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Guyton JL, Perez EA: Fractures of acetabulum and pelvis. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell’s Operative Orthopediacs,
                        Vol 3, 12th edition. Mosby, St. Louis: 2012, 2777–820.
                     2. Mears DC, Durbhakula SM: Fractures and dislocations of the pelvic ring. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic
                        Surgery, Vol I, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 531–85.
                     3. Prevezas N: Evolution of pelvic and acetabular surgery from ancient to modern times. Injury 2007; 38(4):397–409.
                     4. Rice PL Jr, Rudolph M: Pelvic fractures. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2007; 25(3):795–802.

===== PAGE 1008 =====
1008   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of
                                    Acetabulum Fractures
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Although the acetabulum is contained within the bony architecture of the pelvis, surgical manage-
                                    ment of acetabulum fractures are approached separately from pelvic fractures. The goal of surgical treatment of
                                    acetabulum fractures is to preserve the hip joint by accurately reconstructing the supporting bony anatomy. Surgi-
                                    cal treatments of these challenging injuries are performed by surgeons who have undergone specialized training in
                                    orthopedic pelvic surgery. The mechanism of injury is usually high-energy trauma (e.g., motor vehicle, motorcycle
                                    accidents), industrial accidents, or a fall from a height that drives the femur into the acetabulum. Associated injuries
                                    to the pelvis are common, as are associated systemic injuries.
                                    Optimal results are achieved when surgery is performed within 7 d. The approach is dictated mainly by the unique char-
                                    acteristics of the fractures. Essentially, three approaches are commonly used: the ilioinguinal (anterior, Fig. 10.4-3),
                                    the extended iliofemoral (lateral, Fig. 10.4-4), and the Kocher-Langenbeck (posterior, Fig. 10.4-5). The most dif-
                                    ficult portion of the procedure is the reduction; it may be facilitated by neuromuscular relaxation, pelvic reduction
                                    instruments, and traction. The I.I. is used frequently throughout the procedure to assess the reduction and position
                                    of implants, which necessitates the use of lead aprons. A radiograph also is obtained at the end of the case to verify
                                    a satisfactory reduction and position of the implants. Patients are anticoagulated in the postop period to prevent
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                     (i)
                                                    (ii)                                                                                 (iii)
                                                                                                                                         (iv)
                                                                                                                                         (v)
                                                                                                                                         (vi)
                                                   (vii)

                                              Figure 10.4-3. Ilioinguinal approach, right side: (i) Penrose drain around iliopsoas,
                                              femoral nerve, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve; (ii) Penrose drain around femoral
                                              vessels; (iii) bladder and space of Retzius; (iv) pubis; (v) pubic tubercle; (vi) symphysis
                                              pubis; (vii) Penrose drain around spermatic cord. (Redrawn from Sledge CB, ed: The Hip.
                                              Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1009 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of Acetabulum Fractures   1009

                                                                                                         (iv)

                                                                                                         (v)
                                                                                                         (vi)
                                                                                                         (vii)
                                                   (i)                                                   (viii)

                                                                                                         (ix)

                                                         (ii)
                                                                (iii)

                               Figure 10.4-4. Extended iliofemoral approach: (i) Gluteus minimus tendon;
                               (ii) gluteus medius tendon; (iii) gluteus maximus tendon; (iv) superior gluteal
                               neurovascular bundle; (v) sciatic nerve; (vi) piriformis and conjoint tendons; (vii) hip
                               joint capsule; (viii) greater trochanter; (ix) medial femoral circumflex artery overlying
                               quadratus femoris. (Redrawn from Sledge CB, ed: The Hip. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                                                                                                           Gluteus
                                                                                                           medius

                                           Piriformis

                                             Obturator
                                              internis

                                               Obturator
                                                externis
                                                                                                                 Vastus
                                                                                                                 lateralis

                                                    Quadratus
                                                      femoris

                                                                 Gluteus
                                                                maximus

                               Figure 10.4-5. Kocher-Langenbeck approach. (Redrawn from Sledge CB, ed: The
                               Hip. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1010 =====
1010   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    thromboembolic complications. Weight-bearing restrictions are maintained until enough healing has occurred to
                                    permit functional ambulation.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of the acetabulum; nonunion/malunion of the acetabulum

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                  Supine (anterior); lateral decubitus (lateral); prone (posterior)

                                     Incision                  Ilioinguinal (anterior, Fig. 10.4-3); extended iliofemoral (lateral, Fig. 10.4-4), Kocher-Langenbeck
                                                               (posterior, Fig. 10.4-5)

                                     Special                   Pelvic table; pelvic instruments and implants; I.I.; Cell Saver
                                       instrumentation

                                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time             2–5 h

                                     EBL                       100–2000 mL

                                     Postop care               Multiple-trauma: ICU; others: PACU

                                     Mortality                 2.28%

                                     Morbidity                 Ectopic ossification: 24.4%
                                                               Osteoarthritis after perfect reduction: 10.2%; after imperfect reduction: 35.7%
                                                               Injury to lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh: 12%
                                                               Sciatic nerve damage: 6.3%
                                                               Infection: 4.2%
                                                               Avascular bone necrosis: 4.1%
                                                               DVT: 3%
                                                               Wound hematoma: 1.5%
                                                               Secondary displacement of fracture site: 1.5%
                                                               PE: 1%
                                                               Pseudoarthrosis: 0.7%
                                                               Ileus after ilioinguinal approach: Common
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Pain score                7–8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                 12–85 yr

                                     Male:Female               65.6% (M); 34.6% (F)

                                     Etiology                  Motor vehicle accidents (70%); motor vehicle/pedestrian accidents (13%); falls (14%); other (3%)

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Procedures about the Pelvis and Hip, p. 1015.

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Briffa N, Pearce R, Hill AM, Bircher M: Outcomes of acetabular fracture fixation with ten years’ follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg
                                         Br 2011; 93(2):226–36.
                                      2. Gettys FK, Russell GV, Karunakar MA: Open treatment of pelvic and acetabular fractures. Orthop Clin North Am
                                         2011; 42(1):69–83, vi.
                                      3. Guyton JL. Perez EA: Fractures of acetabulum and pelvis. Chapter 56. In: Canale ST, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell’s Operative
                                         Orthopediacs, Vol 3, 12th edition. Mosby, St. Louis: 2012, 2777–820.
                                      4. Prevezas N: Evolution of pelvic and acetabular surgery from ancient to modern times. Injury 2007; 38(4):397–408.
                                      5. Rice PL Jr, Rudolph M: Pelvic fractures. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2007; 25(3):795–802.

===== PAGE 1011 =====
Osteotomy and Bone Graft Augmentation of the Pelvis            1011

                   Osteotomy and Bone Graft Augmentation
                   of the Pelvis
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Acetabular insufficiency (acetabular dysplasia) is characterized by deficient anterior and lateral cover-
                   age of the acetabulum on the femoral head. This condition of the hip produces joint incongruity and instability, even-
                   tually leading to arthrosis and a dysfunctional hip joint. Treatment is aimed at reorienting the dysplastic acetabulum
                   (Fig. 10.4-6). In children, bone grafting alone may be sufficient; in adults, however, pelvic osteotomy, to reorient or
                   broaden the weight-bearing surface, is necessary. A supplemental bone graft to expand the weight-bearing surface
                   may be added. In certain instances following pelvic osteotomy, incongruity of the hip may persist. In this situation,
                   the pelvic osteotomy is combined with a proximal femoral osteotomy to restore congruence. Pelvic and proximal
                   femoral osteotomies usually are fixed internally with screws and plates to allow early mobilization without displace-
                   ment. Weight-bearing is permitted after healing of the osteotomy at ~8 wk.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acetabular dysplasia; developmental dysplasia of the hip

                                                                                                                                                     Orthopedic Surgery
                                  A                            B                          C

                                                                                              50°
                                                         4c
                                                          m

                                                  D                                 E

                               Figure 10.4-6. The Bernese periacetabular osteotomy. (Redrawn from Ganz R,
                               Klaue K, Vinh TS, et al: A new periacetabular osteotomy for the treatment of hip
                               dysplasias: technique and preliminary results. Clin Orthop 1988; 232:26–36.)

===== PAGE 1012 =====
1012   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                  Supine

                                     Incision                  Anterior: ilioinguinal or iliofemoral and Smith-Peterson

                                     Special                   Pelvic instruments and implants; special osteotomes and saws; I.I., Cell Saver
                                       instrumentation

                                     Unique                    Intraop radiographs and use of I.I.
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time             3h

                                     EBL                       500+ mL

                                     Postop care               PACU → room; usually on protected, weight-bearing walker or crutches × 8 wk

                                     Mortality                 Minimal

                                     Morbidity                 Ileus: 100%
                                                               Leg-length discrepancy: Uniformly present after pelvic osteotomy
                                                               Injury to lateral cutaneous nerve: Common (50%)
                                                               Sciatic nerve: Uncommon (1%)
                                                               Thromboembolism: 5–10%
                                                               Wound infection: 1–5%
                                                               Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis: 1–7%
                                                               Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: 1–2%
                                                               Genitourinary problems—urinary retention requiring catheterization: Common
                                                               Hematoma: Common
                                                               Hypotension 2° to retroperitoneal hematoma: Rare
                                                               Vascular complications: Rare

                                     Pain score                8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Age range                     20–50 yr
                                     Male:Female                   3–4 × higher incidence in females for congenital hip dysplasia; equal incidence for other
                                                                   causes
                                     Etiology                      Congenital hip dysplasia; neuromuscular disorders (cerebral palsy, meningomyelocele);
                                                                   pediatric trauma to acetabular growth plate
                                     Associated conditions         Depends on Dx

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Procedures about the Pelvis and Hip (p. 1015).

                                    Arthrodesis of the Sacroiliac Joint
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: In this procedure, a painful and/or unstable sacroiliac (SI) joint is fused, usually by excising the joint
                                    through an anterior or posterior approach and employing an iliac crest bone graft. Supplemental screw fixation of
                                    the joint is used. The incision follows the iliac crest from the anterior superior iliac spine past the convexity of the iliac
                                    tubercle; the aponeurosis of the external abdominal musculature is elevated from the iliac crest. The internal iliac

===== PAGE 1013 =====
Arthrodesis of the Sacroiliac Joint           1013

                   fossa is exposed subperiosteally, posterior to the SI joint; then the joint cartilage is excised and packed with cancel-
                   lous bone strips. The SI joint is fixed with plates and screws. Alternatively, a posterior approach to the SI joint may
                   be used. A straight vertical incision is made just lateral to the posterior superior iliac spine. The origin of the gluteus
                   maximus is elevated from its origin off the posterior ilium and sacrum and reattached laterally. The SI joint is identi-
                   fied, debrided of cartilage, and packed with strips of cancellous bone. It is then fixed with screws.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Anterior or posterior approach
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis or arthrosis of the SI joint; pelvic instability

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                  Supine (anterior) or prone (posterior)

                     Incision                  Lateral portion of ilioinguinal (anterior); posterior approach to SI joint (posterior)

                     Special                   Radiolucent table; pelvic instruments and implants; I.I.; Cell Saver
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                    Intraop radiographs or use of I.I.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time             2–3 h

                     EBL                       250–500 mL

                     Postop care               Usually on protected, weight-bearing walker or crutches × 6–8 wk; anticoagulation for DVT prophylaxis

                     Mortality                 Extremely low

                     Morbidity                 Ileus: Virtually always
                                               Osteomyelitis: < 1%
                                               Wound infection: < 1%
                                               Genitourinary problems; urinary retention requiring catheterization: Common
                                               Delayed union, nonunion, malunion, leg-length discrepancy: Not uncommon
                                               Neurological deficit; injury to lumbosacral plexus: Rare, unless present preop; L5 nerve root sus-
                                               ceptible in anterior approaches

                                                                                                                                                                     Orthopedic Surgery
                                               Hypotension 2° to retroperitoneal hematoma: Rare
                                               Injury to bowel: Rare
                                               Vascular complications; injury to iliac arteries: Rare
                                               Thromboembolism

                     Pain score                7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 20–50 yr

                     Male:Female               Increased incidence in males (trauma)

                     Incidence                 Rare

                     Etiology                  Trauma—postpelvic fracture dislocation; painful septic arthritis

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Procedures about the Pelvis and Hip (p. 1015).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Prevezas N: Evolution of pelvic and acetabular surgery from ancient to modern times. Injury 2007; 38(4):397–409.
                     2. Rice PL Jr, Rudolph M: Pelvic fractures. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2007; 25(3):795–802.
                     3. Wise CL, Dall BE: Minimally invasive sacroiliac arthrodesis: outcomes of a new technique. J Spinal Disord Tech 2008; 21(8):579–84.

===== PAGE 1014 =====
1014   c h a p t e r 10.4    Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    Amputations About the Hip and Pelvis:
                                    Disarticulation of the Hip and Hindquarter
                                    Amputation
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: These surgical procedures accomplish an excision of the entire lower extremity. In a hip disarticu-
                                    lation, the amputation is performed through the hip joint. An anterior, racquet-shaped incision is made, and all
                                    muscles crossing the hip joint are incised or detached. The femoral artery, vein, and nerve; obturator vessels; sciatic
                                    nerve; and deep vessels are isolated and ligated. The gluteal flap is brought anteriorly and sewn to the anterior portion
                                    of the incision. In a hindquarter amputation, excision of the lower extremity, hip joint, and a portion of the pelvis
                                    is performed. Anterior and posterior incisions are used, the iliac wing is divided posteriorly, and the symphysis pubis
                                    is disarticulated anteriorly. Either the common iliac or external iliac vessels are ligated, as are all nerves to the lower
                                    extremity. Usually the gluteal flap is drawn anteriorly for closure. These procedures are performed very rarely—for
                                    severe trauma, tumor, or infection—and are often lifesaving surgeries. They often are performed in conjunction with
                                    a general surgeon, and standard bowel prep is done. The operations are long and tedious, with extensive blood loss,
                                    in patients who are usually systemically ill.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Malignant tumor of femur, hip or pelvis; traumatic amputation to femur, hip, or pelvis;
                                    uncontrollable infection to leg, hip, or pelvis (e.g., clostridia)

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Hip Disarticulation                                       Hindquarter Amputation

                                     Position                 Supine                                                    Lateral decubitus; stabilized by bean bag
                                                                                                                        and/or kidney rests.

                                     Incision                 Anterior racquet type (rare)                              Anterior and posterior

                                     Unique                   Urinary catheter should be placed.                        Urinary catheter; NG tube; scrotum
                                       considerations                                                                   strapped to opposite thigh; anus stitched
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                                        closed/sealed.

                                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or            ⇐
                                                              clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time            3–4 h                                                     4–5 h

                                     EBL                      1000–2000 mL (intraop blood salvage system                2000–3000 mL
                                                              recommended, except for tumors)

                                     Postop care              ICU                                                       ⇐

                                     Mortality                Rare in patients undergoing elective amputation for       ⇐
                                                              trauma or localized tumor; higher for patients with
                                                              debilitated trauma, chronic infection, or extensive
                                                              invasive malignant tumor; highest in clostridial infec-
                                                              tions: ~50%+

                                     Morbidity                Anemia: Common                                            ⇐
                                                              Electrolyte abnormalities: Common                         ⇐
                                                              Hematoma: Common                                          ⇐
                                                              Neurological injury to lumbosacral plexus or              ⇐
                                                                 peripheral nerves: Common
                                                              Paralytic ileus: Common                                   ⇐
                                                              Psychosocial problems: Common                             ⇐
                                                              UTI: Common                                               ⇐
                                                              Flap necrosis: Not uncommon                               ⇐

===== PAGE 1015 =====
Amputations About the Hip and Pelvis: Disarticulation of the Hip and Hindquarter Amputation                1015

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Hip Disarticulation                                      Hindquarter Amputation

                     Morbidity (cont’d)      Incomplete excision with recurrence of tumor or          ⇐
                                                 infection: Not uncommon
                                             Injury to peritoneal or retroperitoneal contents,        ⇐
                                             including bowel and bladder: Not uncommon
                                              Vascular injury—iliac, other vessels: Not uncommon      ⇐

                     Pain Score              10                                                       10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age

                     Male:Female             Similar, except higher incidence in males for traumatic etiologies

                     Incidence               Uncommon

                     Etiology                Malignant tumor; trauma; infection—clostridial myonecrosis, chronic osteomyelitis, etc.

                        
                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR PROCEDURES ABOUT
                        THE PELVIS AND HIP
                   (Procedures covered: ORIF, pelvis, acetabulum; closed reduction, external fixation, pelvis; osteotomy and
                   bone graft of pelvis; arthrodesis of SI joint; amputations about hip and pelvis: disarticulation of hip and hind-
                   quarter amputation)

                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for pelvic surgery generally fall into two categories: (1) Major trauma—pelvic fracture requires
                   substantial force and seldom occurs alone. These patients require aggressive fluid resuscitation with large-bore ivs
                   and invasive monitors (arterial line and CVP). If the patient can be made hemodynamically stable with volume re-

                                                                                                                                                          Orthopedic Surgery
                   suscitation, a thorough evaluation for coexisting neurological, thoracic, or abdominal trauma should be undertaken
                   before anesthesia. (2) Tumor resection and amputation of thigh, hip, and pelvis. Because of large intraop blood loss
                   and 3rd-spacing of fluids, invasive hemodynamic monitoring is necessary. Although epidural anesthesia is seldom
                   adequate for surgery, postop epidural analgesia is an effective means of controlling the tremendous pain caused by
                   this type of surgery. Other patient populations covered in this section include otherwise healthy patients with con-
                   genital or acquired hip dysplasia presenting for augmentation procedures.

                    Respiratory               Trauma patients are at risk for hemothorax, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusion, fat embo-
                                              lism (preop and postop), and aspiration. A chest tube will be needed before surgery if either a
                                              hemothorax or pneumothorax is present. Pulmonary fat embolus occurs in 10–15% of patients
                                              with long-bone fractures and can occur after isolated pelvic fractures. Sx include hypoxemia,
                                              tachycardia, tachypnea, respiratory alkalosis, mental status changes, conjunctival petechiae, fat
                                              bodies in the urine, and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. Sx of pulmonary aspiration are similar
                                              to those of fat embolism. Preop therapy for either should include supplemental O2 to correct
                                              hypoxemia (may necessitate mechanical ventilation) and meticulous fluid management to pre-
                                              vent worsening of pulmonary capillary leak. The best predictor of aspiration/hypoventilation is
                                              reduced level of consciousness, usually measured using the Glasgow Coma Score.
                                              Tests: CXR, or others as indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular            Blunt chest trauma can produce both cardiac contusion and aortic tear. Preop ECG and
                                              CPK isoenzymes will help evaluate the presence of myocardial injury. A wide mediastinal
                                              silhouette suggests aortic tear, which requires evaluation with TEE or angiography.
                                              Tests: Consider ECG; CPK isoenzymes; others as indicated from H&P.

===== PAGE 1016 =====
1016   c h a p t e r 10.4   Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    Neurological             The possibility of coexistent neurologic trauma necessitates a thorough preop mental
                                                             status review and peripheral sensory exam. A CT scan of the head is indicated for any
                                                              patient with loss of consciousness prior to anesthesia.

                                    Musculoskeletal          For trauma patients, C-spine films will evaluate the stability of the C-spine before neck
                                                             manipulation during ET intubation. Thoracic and lumbar x-rays also should be evaluated
                                                             for the presence of traumatic spinal deformity or instability that would require special sta-
                                                             bilization in the anesthetized patient.
                                                             Tests: C-spine x-rays or others as indicated from H&P

                                    Hematologic              Restore Hct to 25% prior to inducing anesthesia. Have available 1 blood volume (70 mL/kg)
                                                             or l total erythrocyte mass (20 mL/kg) for intraop transfusion. Transfusions of more than
                                                             1 blood volume will require monitoring and possible replacement of Plts and coag factors.
                                                             The incidence of DVT is very high in these patients, and prophylaxis with SCDs or low-
                                                             dose sc heparin is indicated whenever feasible.

                                    Renal                    Renal injury commonly results from trauma to the collecting system, myoglobinuria
                                                             from rhabdomyolysis and ischemic, acute, tubular necrosis from hypovolemia or aortic
                                                             dissection. Foley catheters should be placed only after urologic consultation for possible
                                                              urethral tear. Suprapubic catheters are often necessary. Monitoring of UO is mandatory
                                                              to detect intraop compromise of the collecting system and to monitor adequacy of renal
                                                              perfusion.
                                                              Tests: Consider UA; BUN; Cr; others as indicated from H&P.

                                    Laboratory               Hct; electrolytes; other tests as indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication            In hemodynamically stable patients, pain can be treated with morphine (1–2 mg iv q 10
                                                             min titrated to pain relief ) prior to anesthesia.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: GETA is indicated due to the duration and extent of the surgery, as well as the var-
                                    ied positions that are necessary to accomplish pelvic fixation. Regional anesthesia is generally inadequate for
                                    major pelvic surgery; however, in elective surgeries, serious consideration should be given to postop epidural
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    analgesia.

                                    Induction                A rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) is necessary for trauma patients to minimize aspi-
                                                             ration risk. Elective cases can undergo a standard induction (see p. B-2).

                                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Ventilation: lung protective strategy. A ventilatory
                                                             strategy should be adopted with tidal volumes around 5–8 mL/kg and plateau a irway
                                                             pressures below 30 cmH2O. A minimum PEEP of 5 cmH2O should be applied and
                                                             adjusted.

                                    Emergence                Extubate trauma patients when fully awake and protective airway reflexes have
                                                             returned. Do not extubate patients with evolving pulmonary injuries (fat embolism,
                                                             aspiration, or contusion). Monitoring in an ICU usually is indicated for trauma and
                                                             cancer patients. Prolonged stays can be anticipated for patients with severe coexistent
                                                             trauma.

                                    Blood and fluid          Large blood loss                       Expect large blood losses (from 0.5 to 2 or more blood
                                       requirements          IV: 14–16 ga × 2                       volumes) with all but augmentation procedures.
                                                             NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                   Cell-scavenging techniques are useful to reduce
                                                             2–4 U PRBC in OR                       the requirement for blood. Care should be taken to
                                                             Warm fluids.                           ensure that cells have been adequately washed to
                                                             Humidify gases.                        minimize ↓ BP on reinfusion.

===== PAGE 1017 =====
Amputations About the Hip and Pelvis: Disarticulation of the Hip and Hindquarter Amputation                     1017

                    Control of blood           Deliberate hypotension                     Patients with severe cardiovascular disease or carotid
                      loss                     Hemodilution                               artery stenosis are not candidates for ↓ BP. Full re-
                                                                                          placement of any volume deficit is mandatory before
                                                                                          inducing ↓ BP. Commonly used agents are isoflurane
                                                                                          (1–3%) or esmolol (50–200 mcg/kg/min) ± SNP
                                                                                          (0.25–3 mcg/kg/min). These agents are titrated to
                                                                                          produce a 30% ↓ in preop MAP (but not < 60 mm Hg).
                                               In trauma patients                         A cerebral perfusion pressure of > 65 mm Hg is
                                                                                          advocated. A case-by-case decision should be made,
                                                                                           balancing the requirements of cerebral oxygenation
                                                                                           against the risk of worsening hemorrhage. In isolated
                                                                                           head injury, hypotension must not be tolerated: an
                                                                                           arterial pressure of 85–90 mm Hg may be beneficial.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1).            Patients for shelf procedures may require only
                                               Arterial line                              standard monitoring.
                                               CVP line
                                               ± PA catheter                              Patients with myocardial dysfunction should
                                               ± TEE                                      have fluid and inotropic/pressor therapy, guided
                                               UO                                         by continuous central venous saturation moni-
                                                                                          toring, a PA catheter and/or TEE.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                  Meticulous padding of the chest, pelvis, and extremi-
                                               3 eyes                                     ties is imperative to prevent nerve injury and ischemia
                                                                                          of the extremities. ↓ BP → risk of neurovascular injury.

                    Complications              Hypothermia                                Warming of hypothermic patient may unmask se-
                                               Damage to urinary collecting               vere volume depletion that will increase fluid re-
                                               system                                     quirement to well above apparent losses.
                                               Major blood loss
                                               Coagulopathy

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                               Orthopedic Surgery
                    Complications              Nerve root damage                          Preop or intraop damage to L4–S5 nerve roots and
                                               Peripheral nerve damage                    cauda equina, resulting in hemiplegia and bladder
                                                                                          and bowel dysfunction. Neuropathy of the femo-
                                                                                          ral, genitofemoral, and lateral femoral cutaneous
                                                                                          nerves can result from pressure on the ilioinguinal
                                                                                          ligament during surgery.

                    Pain                       IV morphine                                Morphine 1–2 mg iv q 10 min prn
                      management               Spinal opiates                             Epidural hydromorphone 50 mcg/mL infused at
                                                                                          100–250 mcg/h, ± bupivacaine 0.125–0.25% at 4–8
                                                                                          mL/h, provides excellent analgesia.

                    Tests                      Hct
                                               CXR
                                               Coag profile, as indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Harris T, Davenport R, Hurst T, Jones J: Improving outcome in severe trauma: trauma systems and initial management:
                        intubation, ventilation and resuscitation. Postgrad Med J 2012; 88:588–94.
                     2. Masursky D, Dexter F, McCartney CJ, et al: Predicting orthopedic surgeons’ preferences for peripheral nerve blocks for their
                        patients. Anesth Analg 2008; 106(2):561–7.
                     3. Nutescu EA: Assessing, preventing, and treating venous thromboembolism: evidence-based approaches. Am J Health Syst
                        Pharm 2007; 64(11 Suppl 7):S5–13.

===== PAGE 1018 =====
1018   c h a p t e r 10.4    Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                      4. Ranawat AS, Ranawat CS: Pain management and accelerated rehabilitation for total hip and total knee arthroplasty.
                                         J Arthroplasty 2007; 22(7 Suppl 3):12–5.
                                      5. Rosencher N, Bonnet MP, Sessler DI: Selected new antithrombotic agents and neuraxial anaesthesia for major orthopaedic
                                         surgery: management strategies. Anaesthesia 2007; 62(11):1154–60.

                                    Arthroplasty of the Hip
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Total hip arthroplasty is one of the most successful procedures in orthopedic surgery. In this proce-
                                    dure, the hip joint (Fig. 10.4-7) is approached through one of several standard incisions. The femoral head is dislo-
                                    cated from the acetabulum, and the arthritic femoral head and a portion of the neck are excised. The acetabulum is
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                              Figure 10.4-7. Surgical exposure of the hip joint. The hip joint may be exposed
                                              through a number of approaches. The relevant anatomical landmarks are shown here.
                                              (Reproduced with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical Exposures in
                                              Orthopaedics. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1984.)

===== PAGE 1019 =====
Arthroplasty of the Hip   1019

                   reamed to accept a cemented or cementless cup made of metal and plastic. The femoral stem and head are usually
                   modular, allowing for numerous shapes, sizes, lengths, etc. The metallic femoral component may be cemented or
                   cementless. A hybrid total hip combines a cemented femoral stem and a cementless acetabular cup. After relocation
                   of the new prosthetic hip joint and closure of the tissues, the patient may be given an abduction pillow to minimize
                   the risk of dislocation. Mobilization takes place over the ensuing days.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Unipolar (only the femoral side is replaced); bipolar (both the femoral
                   side and the acetabular side are replaced; the acetabular cup is not fixed to the pelvis). Revision procedures are
                   more arduous and time consuming, as the “failed” or loose component(s) must be removed and the bone prepared
                   to accept new cemented or cementless components. These procedures require more specialized equipment for
                   extracting prostheses and cement and rebuilding the femoral or acetabular bone stock (allografts, autografts,
                   etc.). Often, special components are needed for implantation of a new prosthesis. In the Girdlestone procedure
                   (resection arthroplasty), the components are removed, but not replaced. This procedure is usually performed
                   for infection.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of femoral neck; arthritis of hip; arthrosis of hip; loose (or malpositioned) hip
                   prosthesis; chronic dislocation of hip arthroplasty; infected hip arthroplasty

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Unipolar, Bipolar, Total Hip                Revision, Total Hip        Girdlestone Resection
                                           Replacement                                 Replacement                Arthroplasty

                     Position              Supine (for anterior or anterolat-          ⇐                          ⇐
                                           eral approaches); lateral decubitus
                                           position (for lateral or posterior
                                           approaches)

                     Incision              Anterolateral, lateral or posterolateral    ⇐                          ⇐
                                           over hip joint

                     Special               Appropriate prostheses and                  Special instruments for    ⇐
                       instrumentation     instrumentation                             excising cement

                     Unique                In lateral decubitus position, patient is   A trochanteric osteotomy   ⇐
                       considerations      usually stabilized by bean bag and/or       may be performed.

                                                                                                                                                     Orthopedic Surgery
                                           kidney rests. SCDs used.

                     Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h             ⇐                          ⇐ after intraop cultures
                                           (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if
                                           penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time         2–3 h                                       3–6 h or more              3 h or more

                     EBL                   250–750 mL (intraop blood retrieval         ≥ 1000 mL; intraop blood   ⇐
                                           system may be useful).                      retrieval recommended.

                     Postop care           Patient’s legs immobilized between          ⇐                          ⇐
                                           abduction wedge; or operated leg
                                            suspended in a splint or placed in
                                             traction.

                     Mortality             1–2% (increasing with age)                  ⇐                          ⇐

                     Morbidity             DVT:                                        ⇐                          ⇐
                                           • Without prophylaxis: ≥ 50%                ⇐                          ⇐
                                           • With chemoprophylaxis and                ⇐                          ⇐
                                               mechanical prophylaxis: 2–3%
                                           Heterotopic ossification: 3–50%             > 3–50%                    ⇐
                                           (average, 13%; significant, 4–5%)
                                            Intraop cementless fracture: 5–20%         ⇐                          ⇐
                                            UTI: 7–14%                                 ⇐                          ⇐

===== PAGE 1020 =====
1020   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity (cont’d)        Late aseptic loosening requiring revi-          > 5–10%                           ⇐
                                                               sion: 5–10% (after 10 yr)
                                                               Wound infection: 1%                             3–10%                             ⇐
                                                               • Primary psoriatic and diabetic
                                                                  patients: 5–10%
                                                               • Primary OA: 1%
                                                               Hematoma (major): < 5%                          ⇐                                 5–10%
                                                               Femoral/sciatic nerve injury:                   ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                               0.7–3.5%
                                                               PE: 1.8–3.4% (if no prophylaxis)                ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                               Intraop cemented fracture: 1–3%                 2–3%                              1–3%
                                                               Postopsubluxation/dislocation:                  ⇐                                 –
                                                               0.5–3%
                                                               Vascular injury to iliac vessels: < 0.5%        > 0.5%                            ⇐
                                                               Urinary retention requiring catheteriza-        ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                               tion: Common
                                                               GI bleed, MI, cholecystitis:                    ⇐                                 –
                                                               Rare                                                                              Neurological injury: 3–10%

                                     Pain score                7                                               8                                 8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                 Hip fracture and cases of arthrosis of the hip joint: generally > 60 yr
                                                               Arthritis of the hip (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, traumatic
                                                               arthritis): all ages

                                     Male:Female               Dependent on disease etiology

                                     Incidence                 Common: approximately 250,000/yr in United States

                                     Etiology                  Osteoarthritis; seropositive or seronegative arthritis; avascular necrosis; traumatic
                                                               arthritis; congenital dislocation of the hip
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Associated                Dependent on primary conditions (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis patients may have numerous
                                       conditions              deformities, cardiorespiratory disease)

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Hip Procedures (p. 1023).

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Barrack RL: Current guidelines for total joint VTE prophylaxis: dawn of a new day. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl
                                         A):3–7.
                                      2. Berry DJ: Primary total hip arthroplasty. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition, Vol III.
                                         Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 2769–94.
                                      3. Johnson RL, Kopp SL, Hebl JR, Erwin PJ, Mantilla CB: Falls and major orthopaedic surgery with peripheral nerve blockade: a
                                         systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(4):518–28.
                                      4. Sugano N: Computer-assisted orthopaedic surgery and robotic surgery in total hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Surg
                                         2013; 5(1):1–9.
                                      5. Watts CD, Pagnano MW: Minimising blood loss and transfusion in contemporary hip and knee arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg
                                         Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl A):8–10.

===== PAGE 1021 =====
Arthrodesis of the Hip        1021

                   Arthrodesis of the Hip
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: In adults, this procedure is accomplished by fusing the femur to the acetabulum. Some form of internal fixa-
                   tion is usually employed; a spica cast is sometimes placed immediately postop or a few days later. The patient is usually not
                   a good candidate for total hip arthroplasty (e.g., a young, healthy male with unilateral traumatic arthritis). The hip usually
                   is fused in 30° of flexion, 10–30° of external rotation, and neutral-to-slight adduction. The surgical procedure may be per-
                   formed through anterior, lateral, or posterior incisions with the lateral being most common. A trochanteric osteotomy
                   facilitates exposure. After excising the cartilage surfaces, internal fixation, using screws ± a plate, is performed (Fig. 10.4-8).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis or arthrosis of the hip; previous septic arthritis of the hip; recurrent subluxation
                   or dislocation of the hip

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                  Usually supine; occasionally lateral decubitus

                     Incision                  Anterior or lateral thigh

                     Special                   Plates and screws or other internal fixation; reamers from surface replacement arthroplasty set
                       instrumentation         also may be useful; intraop x-ray; fracture table

                     Unique                    Intraop radiographs or I.I. used with patient on fracture table
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time             3–4 h

                     EBL                       500–1000 mL; Cell Saver recommended.

                     Postop care               Spica cast

                     Mortality                 Extremely low

                     Morbidity                 Limb shortening: Some shortening is always present

                                                                                                                                                                 Orthopedic Surgery
                                               Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: 10–15%
                                               Femoral shaft fracture: 5–10%
                                               Wound infection: < 1%
                                               Genitourinary problems: urinary retention requiring catheterization: Common
                                               Ileus: Common
                                               Late degenerative arthritis of other lower extremity joints or back: Common, many years later
                                               Injury to iliac or femoral vessels: Rare
                                               Neurological deficit; injury to lateral cutaneous nerve, sciatic, or femoral nerves: Not uncommon
                                               Osteomyelitis: Rare
                                               Vascular complications: Rare
                                               Superior mesenteric artery syndrome causing duodenal obstruction: Extremely rare
                                               Thromboembolism: See Arthroplasty of the Hip, p. 1018.

                     Pain score                9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 18–50 yr

                     Male:Female               Usually males > females

                     Incidence                 Rare

                     Etiology                  Trauma, general; neuromuscular disorders (cerebral palsy, meningomyelocele); trauma to
                                               acetabular growth plate; congenital hip dysplasia

                     Associated                Depends on etiology.
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1022 =====
1022   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                                Figure 10.4-8. Application of cobra plate after it has molded to the shape of the
                                                acetabulum and femur, and initial fixation with one proximal + distal outrigger
                                                compression screws. (Redrawn from Sledge CB, ed: The Hip. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Hip Procedures (p. 1023).

                                    Suggested Reading
                                      1. Gill PS, Paprosky WG: Failed hip arthroplasty: revision and arthrodesis. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery,
                                         3rd edition, Vol III. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 2795–858.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Synovectomy of the Hip
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: An arthrotomy of the hip joint is performed through one of several standard approaches (anterior,
                                    anterolateral, lateral, posterior). A capsulotomy is performed and is closed with reabsorbable sutures later in the
                                    case. Generally, the hip is not dislocated, but the cartilage surfaces are inspected and documented. The synovium, as
                                    well as any loose bodies, cartilage flaps, and osteophytes, are excised. Although weight bearing is usually protected,
                                    ROM and strengthening exercises are begun early.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic synovitis of hip; loose bodies in hip; juvenile and adult rheumatoid arthritis;
                                    pigmented villonodular synovitis; synovial chondromatosis

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                  Supine for anterior or anterolateral surgical approaches; lateral decubitus for posterior
                                                               approaches

                                     Incision                  Overlying hip joint, depending on specific surgical approach

                                     Unique                    Patient may have systemic disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis); careful positioning of limbs is
                                       considerations          necessary to avoid fracture or skin slough.

                                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

===== PAGE 1023 =====
Synovectomy of the Hip       1023

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Surgical time           2h

                     EBL                     < 500 mL

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Thromboembolism: 10–50%
                                             Neurovascular injury—femoral or sciatic nerve, or iliac vessels: < 3%
                                             Wound infection or dehiscence: < 3%
                                             Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis: < 1% (unless synovectomy is performed for infection)
                                             Avascular necrosis of femoral head: Rare (if hip is not dislocated)
                                             Hematoma: Rare (if drainage tubes used)
                                             Inability to void, requiring urinary catheterization: Common

                     Pain score              7–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               < 60 yr

                     Male:Female             Dependent on disease etiology (e.g., preponderance of females in rheumatoid arthritis)

                     Incidence               Rare

                     Etiology                Septic arthritis (very common); rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile/adult (rare); pigmented villonodular
                                             synovitis (rare); trauma (rare)

                     Associated              See Etiology, above.
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIP PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: hip arthroplasty, arthrodesis, synovectomy)

                        PREOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                           Orthopedic Surgery
                   Osteoarthritis is the most common indication for hip arthroplasty. These patients are usually elderly, and their an-
                   esthetic management is tailored to any concurrent disease. Rheumatoid and other inflammatory arthritides form
                   another group of candidates for these procedures, and the special anesthetic considerations for these patients are out-
                   lined below. Avascular necrosis of the hip is seen in patients with sickle-cell disease and in heart transplant patients.
                   Consider preemptive analgesia with: Gabapentin 600 mg po, celebrex 200 mg po, and acetaminophen 1 g po/iv to be
                   given in the preop holding area.

                    Respiratory              Patients with rheumatoid arthritis frequently have associated pulmonary complications.
                                             SOB on performing activities of daily living or exercise (e.g., climbing a flight of stairs) war-
                                             rants further evaluation with PFTs. Pulmonary effusions are common. Pulmonary fibrosis
                                             (rare) often manifests as cough and dyspnea. Rheumatoid arthritis involvement of the cri-
                                             coarytenoid joints may produce glottic narrowing (requiring small ETT) and manifest as
                                             hoarseness. Arthritic involvement of the TMJ limits mouth opening and may necessitate
                                             special techniques (e.g., fiberoptic or light wand) for ET intubation.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular           The severity of the arthritis often limits exercise; thus, a dobutamine stress ECHO and/or
                                             dipyridamole/thallium imaging may be necessary for adequate cardiac evaluation in pa-
                                             tients with poor exercise tolerance. HTN and cardiovascular disease are common in elderly
                                             patients (dysrhythmias/TIAs → fall → hip fracture). Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with
                                             pericardial effusion, cardiac valve fibrosis, cardiac conduction abnormalities, and aortic re-
                                             gurgitation (AR). An ECG is indicated in all rheumatoid arthritis patients, and ECHO is
                                             indicated for patients with physical Sx suggestive of tamponade or cardiovascular disease.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 1024 =====
1024   c h a p t e r 10.4    Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    Neurological               In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, a thorough neurological exam preop often yields
                                                               evidence of cervical nerve-root compression. Patients with arthritis involving the cervical
                                                               spine should have lateral neck films preop to determine the stability of the atlanto-occipital
                                                               joint. After the stability of the spine has been established, full ROM of the neck should be
                                                               evaluated for evidence of further nerve-root compression or cerebral ischemia (suggesting
                                                               vertebral artery compression). Evidence of cerebral ischemia mandates a neurovascular
                                                               evaluation to plan intraop BP management.
                                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Musculoskeletal            Pain and ↓ joint mobility make positioning and regional anesthesia difficult in patients
                                                               with arthritis.

                                    Hematologic                Rheumatoid arthritis patients often have anemia. Also, anemia may be 2° NSAID gastri-
                                                               tis. Patients with Hb > 12 g/dL are candidates for preop autologous blood donation. Hip
                                                               fracture → potential large-volume blood loss at fracture site. DVT is common after hip
                                                               surgery, and prophylaxis for its occurrence reduces mortality. Effective preventive mea-
                                                               sures include SCDs and sc heparin. NSAID-induced coagulopathy may preclude the use
                                                               of regional anesthesia.
                                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Renal                      Estimation of renal function may be useful to predict drug clearance and the need for inva-
                                                               sive monitoring in this elderly population.
                                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Laboratory                 Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication              In the absence of limited pulmonary reserve or severe cardiac disease, a standard premedi-
                                                               cation (see p. B-1) is appropriate. Full-stomach precautions (p. B-6) may be necessary for
                                                               patients in acute pain. Consider preemptive analgesia (see above).

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: GETA or regional anesthesia (may be difficult 2° pain on positioning).
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction                  The lateral position may mandate ET intubation for patients undergoing GA. A care-
                                                               ful preop airway evaluation will determine the need for special airway techniques
                                                               (e.g., fiberoptic intubation, video laryngoscope, or light wand). Aggravation of cricoaryte-
                                                               noid a rthritis that is common in rheumatoid arthritis patients can be minimized if a small
                                                               ETT (6–7 mm cuffed) is used. For otherwise healthy patients, standard induction (p. B-2)
                                                               is appropriate.

                                    Maintenance                Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Neuromuscular blockade facilitates the placement and
                                                               testing of the prosthesis. In otherwise healthy patients, induced hypotension (e.g., ↓ 20%)
                                                               → ↓ blood loss. Maintain normothermia (forced air blanket and fluid warmer).

                                    Emergence                  No special considerations. PONV prophylaxis (e.g., Ondansetron 4 mg iv).

                                    Regional anesthesia: Regional anesthesia offers the advantages of decreased periop DVT and pulmonary embolus,
                                    decreased intraop blood loss, and a drier surgical field (which may improve conditions for cementing). However, i nduction
                                      of regional anesthesia, with its attendant positioning requirements, can be uncomfortable in patients with limited joint
                                      mobility. Rheumatoid arthritis patients, however, rarely have involvement of the lumbar spine, and regional anesthesia
                                      offers the advantages of decreased periop DVT, decreased intraop blood loss, and no need for airway manipulation.
                                     Sedation or general anesthesia should be offered to supplement the regional technique. A typical dose for a subarachnoid
                                    block is 12.5–15 mg bupivacaine. 10–25 mcg of fentanyl and 100–200 mcg of morphine may be added for improved
                                    pain control up to 24 h postoperatively. Anesthesia to T10 is adequate. Full motor blockade is essential for placement of
                                    the prosthesis and assessment of the passive ROM. Lumbar epidural block (initial dose of 10–15 mL 2% lidocaine with
                                    epinephrine 1:200,000, administered over 10 min) has the advantage of slow onset, allowing time to treat the induced

===== PAGE 1025 =====
Synovectomy of the Hip         1025

                   cardiovascular changes. Postop epidural opiates can provide excellent analgesia. Finally, a lumbar plexus block by the
                   posterior approach (psoas compartment block) provides reliable postoperative analgesia, and hypotension and urinary
                   retention are less common than with SAB or epidural analgesia. However, it is not sufficient for surgical anesthesia as
                   the sole anesthetic. Continuous infusion is always initiated after the initial bolus of 15–20 mL of 0.125% bupivacaine or
                   0.2% ropivacaine. For patients with a high opioid tolerance, the use of a continuous epidural anesthetic (for either hip
                   replacement or knee replacement) should be considered. For opioid tolerant patients, low-dose iv ketamine (e.g., 250
                   mcg/kg/h) for all anesthetic techniques (not just GA) may be given intraop as an adjunct. In an effort to reduce adverse
                   events associated with perioperative opioid consumption, there is emerging interest from the orthopaedic community
                   in eliminating the routine use of opioids in spinal anesthetics.

                    Blood and fluid          Major blood loss                       Cell scavenging helps reduce total transfusion require-
                       requirements          IV: 14–16 ga × 2                       ment. Care should be taken to ensure that cells have been
                                             NS/LR @ 4–8 mL/kg/h                    adequately washed to minimize ↓ BP on reinfusion.

                    Control of blood         Regional anesthesia                    These techniques may be appropriate in selected pa-
                      loss                   Controlled hypotension                 tient populations.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1)         Invasive monitoring is indicated in the presence of
                                             ± CVP line                             exercise-limiting cardiac or pulmonary disease.
                                             ± Arterial line

                    Positioning              Axillary roll, bean bag                Meticulous padding of extremities and maintaining
                                             3 and pad pressure points              a neutral neck position are mandatory. A bean bag
                                             3 eyes                                 and axillary roll also are necessary to stabilize patient
                                                                                    in the lateral position and to protect dependent arm
                                                                                    from neurovascular compression injuries.

                    Complications            Methylmethacrylate:                    Microemboli of air, fat, bone fragments, and cement
                                             • ↓ BP 2° vasodilation                 may occur during pressurized cementing, which may
                                             • ↓ PaO2 2° embolization               lead to hypotension and hypoxia. Hypotension may
                                             • Cardiovascular collapse              be used to achieve a dry operating field, which im-
                                             VAE                                    proves cement penetration into the bone. However,
                                             Major blood loss                       significant hypovolemia must be avoided because
                                             DVT (femoral vein: 80%)                this predisposes to a severe reaction to pressurized
                                             Nerve damage                           cementing. Systemic ↓ BP and pulmonary HTN may

                                                                                                                                                        Orthopedic Surgery
                                             Femur fracture                         occur. Care should be taken to ensure that patient
                                                                                    is adequately hydrated before and during the proce-
                                                                                    dure, and pressors may be necessary to maintain BP
                                                                                    (ephedrine 5–20 mg iv or epinephrine 10– 100 mcg iv
                                                                                    and increasing the dose as necessary).

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Nerve damage                             Sciatic nerve injury is evidenced by foot drop and
                                             DVT                                      an inability to flex the knee.
                                             Continued blood loss

                    Pain                     Neuraxial regimens:
                      management             • SAB                                    Intrathecal morphine 0.2–0.3 mg provides analgesia
                                                                                      for up to 24 h after administration. May be adminis-
                                                                                      tered along with bupivacaine for surgical anesthesia.
                                                                                      Epidural bupivacaine 0.0125% 6–8 mL/h and hy-
                                             • Epidural analgesia                     dromorphone 50 mcg/mL infused at 100–250
                                                                                      mcg/h provides good analgesia. Prior to removal of
                                                                                      the epidural catheter a 0.2 mg bolus of hydromor-
                                                                                      phone may be given. Epidural catheters are typically
                                                                                      removed on the morning of postoperative day 2.
                                                                                      Low-molecular-weight heparin may be started 2 h
                                                                                      after catheter removal.

===== PAGE 1026 =====
1026   c h a p t e r 10.4     Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    Pain                        Continuous lumbar plexus (psoas            Infusion with 0.2% ropivacaine or 0.125% bupiva-
                                      management                compartment) block                         caine maintained at 6–12 mL/h.
                                      (cont’d)                  Systemic regimens                          Acetaminophen (1 g q 6h) and celebrex (200 mg q d)
                                                                                                           should be initiated immediately postop (if not con-
                                                                                                           traindicated). Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA)
                                                                                                           with iv morphine or hydromorphone may be initi-
                                                                                                           ated as alternative to neuraxial blocks or to supple-
                                                                                                           ment a continuous lumbar plexus (psoas compart-
                                                                                                           ment) block. Consider pain service consult.

                                    Tests                       Hct
                                                                CXR, if CVP was placed.
                                                                Monitor UO

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Fung DL: Anesthesia and pain management. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition, Vol I.
                                         Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 133–56.
                                      2. Masursky D, Dexter F, McCartney CJ, et al: Predicting orthopedic surgeons’ preferences for peripheral nerve blocks for their
                                         patients. Anesth Analg 2008; 106(2):561–7.
                                      3. Miller AG, McKenzie J, Greenky M, et al: Spinal anesthesia: should everyone receive a urinary catheter?: a randomized,
                                         prospective study of patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2013; 95(16):1498–503.
                                      4. Ranawat AS, Ranawat CS: Pain management and accelerated rehabilitation for total hip and total knee arthroplasty.
                                         J Arthroplasty 2007; 22(7 Suppl 3):12–5.
                                      5. Rosencher N, Bonnet MP, Sessler DI: Selected new antithrombotic agents and neuraxial anaesthesia for major orthopaedic
                                         surgery: management strategies. Anaesthesia 2007; 62(11):1154–60.
                                      6. Vieira EM, Goodman S, Tanaka PP: Anesthesia and rheumatoid arthritis. Rev Bras Anesthesiol 2011; 61:367–75.

                                    Open Reduction And Internal Fixation (Orif)
                                    Of Proximal Femoral Fractures (Femoral Neck,
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Intertrochanteric, Subtrochanteric Fractures)

                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Fractures of the proximal femur are seen in two distinct populations: most commonly in elderly
                                    patients as the result of falls, and in younger patients following trauma. In elderly patients, the fracture oc-
                                    curs through osteoporotic bone in the femoral neck, intertrochanteric, or subtrochanteric area (Fig. 10.4-9).
                                    Displaced femoral neck fractures are usually treated by prosthetic replacement. Nondisplaced or minimally
                                    displaced femoral neck fractures are usually treated by closed reduction and percutaneous pinning of the
                                    fracture. Intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures, whether displaced or nondisplaced, are usually treated
                                    by ORIF with a sliding hip screw and side plate, cephalomedullary nail, or blade plate (Fig. 10.4-10). Pros-
                                    thetic replacement is performed only rarely. Elderly patients frequently have numerous medical problems, which
                                    means that the fractures require prompt internal fixation/prosthetic replacement to facilitate early mobilization.
                                    In younger patients (16–40 yr), proximal femoral fractures are almost always treated by ORIF with screws, plates
                                    and screws, or intramedullary devices. These are normally much higher energy fractures, often associated with
                                    multiple traumas.
                                    Variant procedure or approaches: Variants include: percutaneous pinning of nondisplaced femoral neck frac-
                                    ture; ORIF of displaced femoral neck fracture (also see Arthroplasty of the Hip, p. 1018); ORIF of intertrochan-
                                    teric or subtrochanteric fracture.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Nondisplaced femoral neck fracture; displaced femoral neck fracture (those not requiring
                                    prosthetic replacement); intertrochanteric ± subtrochanteric fracture

===== PAGE 1027 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of Proximal Femoral Fractures   1027

                                                                                      Fe
                                                                                         m
                                                                                          or
                                                                                            al
                                                                                                 he
                                                                                                   ad
                                                                                   Zone of
                                                 Greater                       femoral neck
                                                 trochanter                     (subcapital)
                                                                                  fractures
                                                                     Zone of
                                                                intertrochanteric
                                                                    fractures

                                                                                          Lesser
                                                                                          trochanter

                                                                      Zone of
                                                                  subtrochanteric       4 cm
                                                                     fractures

                               Figure 10.4-9. Anatomical classification of fractures of the proximal femur. (Redrawn
                               from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott: 1988.)

                                                                                                                                              Orthopedic Surgery

                               Figure 10.4-10. Intertrochanteric hip fracture treated with dynamic hip screw.
                               (Redrawn from Sledge CB, ed: The Hip. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1028 =====
1028   c h a p t e r 10.4   Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                                  Intertrochanteric ±
                                                            Nondisplaced Femoral Neck               Displaced Femoral Neck        Subtrochanteric
                                                            Fracture                                Fracture                      Fracture

                                     Position               Supine, on fracture table               ⇐                             ⇐

                                     Incision               Proximal lateral thigh                  ⇐                             ⇐

                                     Special                Usually multiple percutaneous           Multiple screws or other      Screw-plate device or intra-
                                       instrumentation      pins                                    devices                       medullary device

                                     Unique                 Fracture table and I.I. used. Per-      ⇐                             ⇐
                                       considerations       cutaneous pinning may be accom-
                                                            plished with local anesthesia only.

                                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h         ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            (vancomycin or clindamycin for
                                                            24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time          1h                                      1.5–2 h, including placing    1.5–3 h
                                                                                                    patient on fracture table
                                                                                                    and obtaining adequate
                                                                                                    reduction of fracture

                                     EBL                    < 100 mL                                250–500 mL                    500+ mL

                                     Postop care            Generally PACU → room; if medi-         ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            cally unstable, → ICU

                                     Mortality              10–30% in first 12 mo postop in         ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            elderly; in younger patients, de-
                                                            pends on other involved trauma.

                                     Morbidity               Dysrhythmias: ~50%                     ⇐                             ⇐
                                                             MI: ~50%                               ⇐                             ⇐
                                                             Respiratory failure: ~50%              ⇐                             ⇐
                                                             Urinary retention requiring            ⇐                             ⇐
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                            catheterization: ~50%
                                                             UTI: ~50%                              ⇐                             ⇐
                                                             Thromboembolism: 40%+                  ⇐                             ⇐
                                                             Avascular necrosis and late            ≥ 15–35%                      1%
                                                             segmental collapse: 10–20%
                                                              Infection, deep: 2–17%                ⇐                             ⇐
                                                              Infection, superficial: 2–17%         ⇐                             ⇐
                                                              Septic arthritis: 2–17%               ⇐                             ⇐
                                                              Nonunion: 5–15%                       20–30%                        2%
                                                              Malunion: < 10%                       > 10%                         10–20%
                                                              Loss of reduction: < %5               > 10%                         10%
                                                              Hematoma                              –                             –
                                                              Intraop comminution of the fracture   –                             –
                                                              Neurological injury: Rare             ⇐                             ⇐
                                                              Vascular injury: Rare                 ⇐                             ⇐

                                     Pain score             5–6                                     7                             8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range              Usually > 60 yr (patients with an intertrochanteric fracture average 65–70 yr); occasionally,
                                                            younger patients, 16–35 yr (as part of multiple-trauma situation)

                                     Male:Female            Elderly 1:4–5

===== PAGE 1029 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif) of Distal Femur Fractures               1029

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence                Extremely common—about 5–100/100,000; femoral neck fractures are about twice as common
                                              as intertrochanteric fractures.

                     Etiology                 Accidents and falls (may be 2° TIA, stroke, MI, dysrhythmia); pathological fracture; multiple
                                              trauma (younger patients); stress fracture

                     Associated               Numerous serious medical conditions often present in elderly; senile dementia; multiple trauma
                       conditions             often

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Kearns RJ, Moss L, Kinsella J: A comparison of clinical practice guidelines for proximal femoral fracture. Anaesthesia
                        2013; 68(2):159–66.
                     2. Moja L, Piatti A, Pecoraro V, et al: Timing matters in hip fracture surgery: patients operated within 48 hours have better
                        outcomes. A meta-analysis and meta-regression of over 190,000 patients. PLoS One 2012; 7(10):e46175.
                     3. Palmer JS, Huber CP: Operative management of hip fractures: a review of the NICE guidelines. Br J Hosp Med (Lond)
                        2012; 73(9):C141–44.
                     4. Pivec R, Johnson AJ, Mears SC, Mont MA: Hip arthroplasty. Lancet 2012; 380(9855):1768–77.

                   Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (Orif)
                   of Distal Femur Fractures
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: ORIF of the distal femur fracture involves a longitudinal incision along the femoral shaft, obtaining
                   reduction by direct visualization of the fracture fragments, and applying plates and screws along the femur for rigid

                                                                                                                                                             Orthopedic Surgery
                   internal fixation. An iliac crest bone graft may be necessary. Some intramedullary devices are also available for fixa-
                   tion of these fractures.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of the distal femur; nonunion/malunion of the distal femur; degenerative arthritis
                   of knee, with deformity

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine. Patient usually arrives at OR in balanced traction if fracture is acute.

                     Incision                 Anterior knee, lateral or medial thigh along the femoral shaft

                     Special                  Special plates, screws, rods, reduction clamps; radiolucent table; intraop blood salvage
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   Usually requires intraop radiographs; tourniquet.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time            3 h (or more, depending on difficulty)

                     EBL                      750 mL or more

                     Postop care              Multiple-trauma victim → ICU; others → PACU

                     Mortality                ~3–4%, depending on the extent of multiple trauma

===== PAGE 1030 =====
1030   c h a p t e r 10.4   Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity              Nonunion: 4–33%
                                                            Malunion: 4–31%
                                                            Infection, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis; closed/open:
                                                                Grade I: 1–5%
                                                                Grade II: 5–20%
                                                                Grade III: > 20%
                                                            Delayed union: 0–17%
                                                            Vascular complications: 2–3%
                                                            Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves, peroneal nerve: ~3%
                                                            Compartment syndrome: Rare
                                                            Hypotension: Rare
                                                            Leg-length discrepancy: Rare
                                                            Respiratory distress and fat embolism: Rare

                                     Pain score             8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range              Any age; predominance of males < 40 yr (trauma); degenerative arthritis of knee < 60 yr. Spe-
                                                            cial rare case is elderly patient with a supracondylar fracture above a total knee replacement.

                                     Male:Female            5:1

                                     Incidence              Common in trauma center patients; rare in cases of degenerative arthritis of knee (osteotomy) or
                                                            elderly patient with a supracondylar fracture above a total knee replacement.

                                     Etiology               Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents; falls; industrial injury; degenerative arthritis of knee

                                     Associated             Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems.
                                       conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                                    OPEN REDUCTION AND INTERNAL FIXATION (ORIF) OF
                                    THE FEMORAL SHAFT WITH PLATE
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: ORIF of the femoral shaft involves obtaining a reduction by open means, usually through a longitu-
                                    dinal lateral incision along the length of the femur, and applying plates and screws along the femur to maintain the
                                    reduction. An iliac crest bone graft may be necessary.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of femur

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position               Supine or lateral decubitus

                                     Incision               Lateral thigh along length of femur ± iliac crest incision

                                     Special                Special plates, screws; reduction clamps; blood salvage device
                                       instrumentation

===== PAGE 1031 =====
Intramedullary Nailing of Femoral Shaft           1031

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Unique                    Fracture or radiolucent table; I.I. Patient usually arrives at OR in balanced traction.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time             3 h or more, depending on difficulty

                     EBL                       750 mL; Cell Saver recommended.

                     Postop care               Multiple-trauma victims: ICU
                                               Others: PACU

                     Mortality                 Dependent on extent of multiple trauma

                     Morbidity                 Knee stiffness: 20–30%
                                               Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: 5–21%
                                               Leg-length discrepancy: 0–11%
                                               Failure of fixation: 5–10%
                                               Infection, osteomyelitis: < 5%
                                               Hypotension: Not uncommon
                                               Respiratory distress and fat embolism: Not uncommon, often subclinical
                                               Compartment syndrome: Rare
                                               Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves: Rare
                                               Vascular complications: Rare

                     Pain score                9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                     Male:Female               5:1

                     Incidence                 Unknown

                     Etiology                  Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents; falls; industrial injuries

                                                                                                                                                                  Orthopedic Surgery
                     Associated                Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Nahm NJ, Vallier HA: Timing of definitive treatment of femoral shaft fractures in patients with multiple injuries: a systematic
                        review of randomized and nonrandomized trials. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012; 73(5):1046–63.

                   Intramedullary Nailing of Femoral Shaft
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Intramedullary nailing of the femur is the standard procedure for fractures of the femoral shaft
                   (Fig. 10.4-11). It is indicated for virtually any fracture, from the lesser trochanter to the distal femur, within 7 cm of
                   the articular surface. The procedure also is used for the treatment of nonunions and malunions of the femoral shaft.
                   Typically, the nail is placed in an anterograde fashion from proximal to distal. There are, however, indications in which

===== PAGE 1032 =====
1032   c h a p t e r 10.4    Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                    the nail is inserted in a retrograde fashion from distal to proximal
                                    (e.g., bilateral femur fractures; ipsilateral femur and tibia fractures;
                                                                                                                        A                        B
                                    distal femur fractures; and multiple-trauma, obese, and pregnant
                                    patients). Early fixation of femoral shaft fractures in severe poly-
                                    trauma has several benefits. The advantages of early fixation of long
                                    bones include improved pain control, early mobilization, improved
                                    pulmonary function, and decreased morbidity and mortality.
                                    Femoral nails are inserted after reaming the intramedullary canal,
                                    which allows a larger diameter implant and improves the mechani-
                                    cal properties of the bone implant interface. Reaming may produce
                                    systemic effects by embolic showering of medullary contents to the
                                    pulmonary vasculature, a phenomenon that has been documented
                                    by TEE. This situation may be exacerbated in the polytrauma patient
                                    with pulmonary injury and may produce posttraumatic pulmonary
                                    failure. Patients with femur fractures may have associated injuries.            Figure 10.4-11. A: Simple and
                                    Patients may arrive from the ICU in skeletal traction or from the               B: locked intramedullary fixation
                                    emergency department, especially in the case of an open fracture.               of femoral shaft. (Reproduced with
                                    Hemorrhage up to 1 L may be contained in the thigh following a                  permission from Hardy JD: Hardy’s
                                    femur fracture; therefore, patients may be hypovolemic at the start             Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB
                                    of the procedure. Because the procedure is essentially percutane-               Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)
                                    ous, apparent blood loss may be underestimated because of the
                                    hemorrhaged blood contained in the thigh.
                                    The patient is placed in the supine or lateral decubitus position on either a radiolucent table or a fracture table. Ante-
                                    grade insertion of the nail requires a lateral incision several cm in length proximal to the greater trochanter. The hip
                                    abductors are split, and portal into the femoral canal is created in the piriformis fossa. The femoral canal is reamed over
                                    a guide wire. The intramedullary nail is then inserted into the intramedullary canal with gentle taps, using a hammer.
                                    Retrograde insertion of the nail is performed through an incision several cm long over the anterior aspect of the
                                    knee. The knee joint is entered and the portal to the intramedullary canal is made in the non-weight-bearing portion
                                    of the intercondylar notch. The nail is inserted in the same fashion as the anterior nail. Cross-locking screws are com-
                                    monly used, and they are inserted through the rod.
                                    Variant procedure or approaches: The application of femoral nailing has been expanded to treat nonunions,
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    malunions, posttraumatic deformities of the femur, and leg-length differences. Specialized additional equipment,
                                    such as an intramedullary saw or an external fixator, may be required for these procedures.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Femur fracture; nonunion/malunion of the femur; leg-length discrepancy

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                 Supine or lateral decubitus

                                     Incision                 Proximal lateral thigh or anterior knee

                                     Special                  Intramedullary nails; intramedullary saw for closed femoral shortening of femur; fracture or radio-
                                       instrumentation        lucent table; I.I.

                                     Unique                   Patient may have multiple traumas with other associated injuries. Procedure is heavily dependent
                                       considerations         on I.I.

                                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time            2–3 h; 3+ h for nonunion/malunion of femur or closed femoral shortening of femur

                                     EBL                      250–500 mL; ≥ 750 mL for nonunion/malunion of femur or closed femoral shortening of femur
                                                              (Cell Saver recommended).

                                     Postop care              If surgery performed acutely, patient is usually a multiple-trauma victim with numerous injuries
                                                              and extensive blood loss; usually goes to ICU.

                                     Mortality                Dependent on extent of trauma

===== PAGE 1033 =====
Repair of Nonunion/Malunion of Proximal Third of Femur, Proximal Femoral Osteotomy for Osteoarthritis                       1033

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity                Respiratory distress and fat embolism: 10%
                                              Malunion: 5–10%
                                              Infection, osteomyelitis:
                                                 Open technique: 1–10%
                                                 Closed technique: 0–1%
                                              Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves: 2%
                                              Vascular complications: ~2% (up to 15% have occult vascular abnormalities)
                                              Delayed union: 1%
                                              Nonunion: 1%
                                              Hypotension: Common in multiple-trauma situations
                                              Knee stiffness: Common
                                              Leg-length discrepancies: Not uncommon
                                              Compartment syndrome: Rare
                                              Failure of fixation: Rare

                     Pain score               6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                    Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                     Male:Female                  5:1

                     Incidence                    Very common

                     Etiology                     Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents (60–80%); falls (5–10%); industrial injuries (5–10%);
                                                  previous trauma (rare)

                     Associated conditions        Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                                                                                                                                                             Orthopedic Surgery
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Rhorer AS: Percutaneous/minimally invasive techniques in treatment of femoral shaft fractures with an intramedullary nail.
                        J Orthop Trauma 2009; 23(5 Suppl):S2–5.
                     2. Ricci WM, Gallagher B, Haidukewych GJ: Intramedullary nailing of femoral shaft fractures: current concepts. J Am Acad
                        Orthop Surg 2009; 17(5):296–305.

                   Repair of Nonunion/Malunion of Proximal Third
                   of Femur, Proximal Femoral Osteotomy for
                   Osteoarthritis
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Operations for nonunion/malunion of the proximal femur entail realigning the bones with a femo-
                   ral osteotomy (as necessary); stabilizing the reduction with internal fixation (using a nail/plate-nail/rod device);
                   and supplementing this with a bone graft. In young patients (< 50 yr) in whom early osteoarthritis of the hip
                   spares some of the cartilage, the hip may be realigned with proximal femoral osteotomy. This entails cutting the
                   bone at the level of the lesser trochanter, realigning the hip, and stabilizing the osteotomy with internal fixation.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Osteotomy of proximal 1/3 of femur for degenerative arthritis of hip
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nonunion/malunion of proximal 1/3 of femur; early degenerative arthritis of hip

===== PAGE 1034 =====
1034   c h a p t e r 10.4   Hip, Pelvis, Upper Leg Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Repair Nonunion/Malunion                            Proximal Femoral Osteotomy

                                     Position                Supine or lateral decubitus                         ⇐

                                     Incision                Proximal lateral thigh                              ⇐

                                     Special                 Plates, screws; reduction clamps; occasion-         ⇐
                                       instrumentation       ally, an intramedullary device. Cell Saver
                                                             recommended. Some surgeons use fracture or
                                                             radiolucent table with I.I.

                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin         ⇐
                                                             or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time           2 h for bone grafting alone; 3 h or more if         3h
                                                             difficult malunion

                                     EBL                     500–750 mL or more                                  500 mL +

                                     Mortality               Rare: < 1%                                          ⇐

                                     Morbidity               Leg-length discrepancy: Common                      –
                                                             Technical complications/fixation failure: 1–5%      ⇐
                                                             Superficial, deep infection/osteomyelitis: 1%       ⇐
                                                             Malunion: Not uncommon                              –
                                                             Compartment syndrome: Rare                          ⇐
                                                             Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves: Rare     ⇐
                                                             Vascular complications: Rare                        ⇐
                                                                                                                 Progressive pain/arthritis (by 5–10 yr):
                                                                                                                 40–50%
                                                                                                                 Delayed union: 5–10%
                                                                                                                 Nonunion: 1–5%

                                     Pain score              8                                                   8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Age range               Any age                                           ⇐

                                     Male:Female             1:1                                               ⇐

                                     Incidence               Rare                                              ⇐

                                     Etiology                Previous surgery (rare); previous trauma (rare) Early degenerative arthritis of the hip (not uncommon)

                                     Associated              May accompany multiple traumas                    ⇐
                                       conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                                    Closed Reduction and External Fixation of Femur
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: This procedure entails manipulating the femur to obtain an acceptable reduction by closed or limited-
                                    open means, then applying an external fixation device to maintain the reduction. The pins for the external fixator are
                                    inserted percutaneously or through small incisions. This method of treatment may be used for severe open fractures
                                    (e.g., grade III) with extensive bone and soft-tissue injury.

===== PAGE 1035 =====
Closed Reduction and External Fixation of Femur    1035

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Displaced, open fracture of the femur

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position              Supine or lateral

                     Incision              Done percutaneously or through small incisions

                     Special               External fixation device of surgeon’s choice; radiolucent table with I.I.
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                Fracture is usually an open, extremely comminuted fracture in a multiple-trauma patient.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time         1h

                     EBL                   Operative blood loss usually 100–200 mL; however, blood loss may be extensive before surgery.

                     Postop care           Multiple-trauma victims → ICU; others → PACU

                     Mortality             Dependent on extent of trauma

                     Morbidity             Refracture: 2–12%
                                           Hypotension 2° blood loss and other injuries: Common
                                           Stiffness of knee: Common
                                           Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: More common in comminuted, open fractures
                                           Leg-length discrepancy: More common in severely comminuted fractures
                                           Osteomyelitis: More common in open fractures
                                           Respiratory distress: More common in multiple-trauma situations
                                           Amputation: Rare
                                           Compartment syndrome: Rare
                                           Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves: Rare
                                           Vascular complications: Rare

                     Pain score            9–10 (due to extensive open fracture)

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                     Male:Female           5:1

                     Incidence             Common

                     Etiology              Motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents; falls; industrial injury

                     Associated            Frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems, including head and neck, chest, ab-
                       conditions          domen, and extremities; these will often be treated simultaneously with the femur fracture.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures (p. 1083).

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Hip Fractures, Types and Fixation – Everything you Need to Know – Dr. Ebraheim:
                   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wok5JGEpTQ
                   Hip Replacement Surgery: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BYwVaKkRdF4
                   Femoral Shaft Fracture Intramedullary Nailing: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOCf8MhnQBs
                   Ultrasound-Guided Femoral Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ht_N8j2KL8
                   Ultrasound-Guided Subgluteal Sciatic Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rl8rZOEMveE

===== PAGE 1036 =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.5 Knee Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           James I. Huddleston, MD
                                           John J. Csongradi, MD
                                           Stuart B. Goodman, MD, PhD, FRCSC, FACS

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Frederick G. Mihm, MD
                                           Pedro P. Tanaka, MD

===== PAGE 1038 =====
ARTHROPLASTY OF THE KNEE
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: In this procedure, an arthrotomy of the knee joint is performed, and metallic and plastic components
                                    are used for replacement of the knee joint surfaces (total knee replacement). The femur, patella, and tibia are ex-
                                    posed; cartilage and minimal bone are excised with a saw. The new components may be cemented or uncemented.
                                    Alternatively, arthroplasty may be performed on only one compartment of the knee (i.e., medial/lateral unicompart-
                                    mental knee replacement). In revision procedures, one or more components of the old joint are removed, and new
                                    components are placed. In resection or excision arthroplasty of the knee (usually for infection of the prosthesis),
                                    the components are removed, but not replaced.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis of knee; arthrosis of knee; loose (or malpositioned) knee prosthesis; infected knee

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                                        Resection/
                                                             Knee Replacement                                     Revision              Excision

                                     Position                Supine                                               ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Incision                Anterior or anteromedial over patella                ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Special                 Appropriate prostheses and instrumentation           Special instruments   ⇐
                                       instrumentation                                                            for excising cement

                                     Unique                  ± Tourniquet; ± SCD                                  ⇐                     ⇐
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or       ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time           2h                                                   3–4 h or more         3h

                                     Closing                 In infected or complex revision cases (rare), a      ⇐                     ⇐
                                       considerations        local or free flap is required.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     EBL                     300–500 mL                                           500–1000 mL           ⇐

                                     Postop care             Bulky dressing or splint; continuous passive mo-     ⇐                     Splint/cast
                                                             tion (CPM) may begin in the PACU or ward

                                     Mortality               Rare                                                 ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Morbidity               DVT, without prophylaxis: 50–75%                     ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             DVT, with prophylaxis (e.g., low-molecular-weight    ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             heparin, coumadin, SCD, antiembolism stockings):
                                                             2–3%
                                                             Postop subluxation/dislocation of patella: 20%       > 30%                 –
                                                             Superficial wound necrosis: 10–15%                   > 10–15%              ≥ 10–15%
                                                             Wound infection:                                     > 5–10%               Rare
                                                               Primary rheumatoid or psoriatic
                                                               arthritis, diabetes: 5–10%
                                                             Primary osteoarthritis (OA): 1%
                                                             PE: 1–7%                                             ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             Postop subluxation/dislocation of knee joint: 1–6%   ≥ 1–6%                –
                                                             Late aseptic loosening requiring revision after      –                     –
                                                             ~10 yr: 5%
                                                             Peroneal nerve injury: 1–5%                          > 1–5% (more          1–5%
                                                                                                                  common in difficult
                                                                                                                  revisions)
                                                             Urinary retention requiring catheterization:         –                     –
                                                             Common

                             1038

===== PAGE 1039 =====
Arthrodesis of the Knee      1039

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                                                                                                                    Resection/
                                              Knee Replacement                                          Revision                    Excision

                     Morbidity (cont.)        Hematoma requiring reoperation: Rare                      –                           –
                                              Hypotension                                               –                           –
                                              Knee stiffness                                            –                           –
                                              Intraoperative fracture: Rare                             ⇐                           ⇐
                                              Wound dehiscence: Rare                                    –                           –
                                              Fat embolism: Rare                                        –                           –
                                              Vascular injury to popliteal vessels: Rare                –                           –

                     Pain score               7                                                         8                           9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Generally, > 60 yr. Arthritis of the knee (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis);
                                              hemophilia, ≥ 18 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Common (~400,000/yr in the United States)

                     Etiology                 Arthrosis of the knee (degenerative joint disease [DJD] or OA); seropositive or seronegative ar-
                                              thritis; traumatic arthritis; hemophiliac arthropathy of the knee

                     Associated               Dependent on primary condition (e.g., osteoarthritis)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                 Orthopedic Surgery
                     1. Barrack RL: Current guidelines for total joint VTE prophylaxis: dawn of a new day. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012;
                        94(11 Suppl A):3–7.
                     2. Ganapathy S: Wound/intra-articular infiltration or peripheral nerve blocks for orthopedic joint surgery: efficacy and safety
                        issues. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(5):615–20.
                     3. Higuera CA, Deirmengian C: The new technologies in knee arthroplasty. J Clin Rheumatol 2012; 18(7):345–8.
                     4. Johnson RL, Kopp SL, Hebl JR, Erwin PJ, Mantilla CB: Falls and major orthopaedic surgery with peripheral nerve blockade: a
                        systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(4):518–28.
                     5. Kuper M, Rosenstein A: Infection prevention in total knee and total hip arthroplasties. Am J Orthop 2008; 37(1):E2–5.
                     6. NIH Consensus Statement on total knee replacement. NIH Consens State Sci Statements 2003; 20(1):1–34.
                     7. Watts CD, Pagnano MW: Minimising blood loss and transfusion in contemporary hip and knee arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg
                        Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl A):8–10.

                   ARTHRODESIS OF THE KNEE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: In this procedure, the femur is fused to the tibia, obliterating the knee joint. Through a midline incision
                   and anterior or median parapatellar arthrotomy, the cartilage surface and a small amount of bone are excised. The cut
                   ends are opposed and aligned in 0–20° of flexion and 5–10% of valgus. The bones are stabilized with plates, screws,
                   an intramedullary rod, or an external fixator.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis or other arthrosis of the knee; previous septic arthritis of the knee; failed or
                   infected knee arthroplasty

===== PAGE 1040 =====
1040   c h a p t e r 10.5   Knee Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position               Usually supine

                                     Incision               Anterior midline over knee

                                     Special                External fixator; internal fixation with plates and screws or intramedullary nail
                                       instrumentation

                                     Unique                 Intraop radiographs or I.I.; tourniquet
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time          3 h (+ 1 h, if necessary, to excise total knee arthroplasty)

                                     Closing                Cast or splint while anesthetized
                                       considerations

                                     EBL                    < 100 mL, if tourniquet and local fixation used.
                                                            500–1000 mL, if no tourniquet used, or if intramedullary procedures are used.

                                     Mortality              Rare, but depends primarily on age and medical condition of patient.

                                     Morbidity              Thromboembolism ≥ incidence following total knee replacement:
                                                            DVT (without prophylaxis): 50–75%
                                                            DVT (if prophylaxis used): 10–20%
                                                            PE (if no prophylaxis; reduced if anticoagulation or SCDs used): 1–7%
                                                            Failure of fusion (nonunion), malunion: 10%
                                                               After failed knee replacement: 19–44%
                                                               With Charcot joint: as high as 50%
                                                               Pin tract infection: ≥ 1–10%
                                                            Wound infection: 5%
                                                            Deep infection and osteomyelitis
                                                            Urinary retention requiring catheterization, UTI: Common
                                                            Breakage or failure of internal or external fixation: Rare
                                                            Fat embolism: Rare
                                                            GI bleed, MI: Rare
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                            Hematoma: Rare
                                                            Hypotension: Rare
                                                            Intraop femoral or tibial fracture: Rare
                                                            Neurological injury, usually popliteal nerve or peroneal nerve: Rare
                                                            Superficial wound necrosis and wound dehiscence: Rare
                                                            Vascular injury to popliteal vessels: Rare
                                                            Amputation: Extremely rare (usually 2° acute arterial occlusion or uncontrollable local sepsis)

                                     Pain score             9

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range              Any age

                                     Male:Female            1:1

                                     Incidence              Rare

                                     Etiology               Failed or infected total knee replacement (probably most common etiology); trauma to knee—
                                                            unreconstructable, intraarticular fractures; total unstable knee or failed ligament repairs with
                                                            severe DJD in a young patient

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

===== PAGE 1041 =====
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (ORIF) of Patellar Fractures       1041

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Somayaji HS, Tsaggerides P, Ware HE, Dowd GS: Knee arthrodesis—a review. Knee 2008; 15(4):247–54.

                   OPEN REDUCTION AND INTERNAL FIXATION
                   (ORIF) OF PATELLAR FRACTURES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: In ORIF of patellar fractures, a short incision over the patella is used to perform a reduction by direct
                   visualization of the fracture fragments of the patella. Because this is generally an intraarticular fracture, the frag-
                   ments should be reduced precisely. The torn quadriceps retinaculum is also repaired. Part or all of the patella may be
                   excised; pins, wires, and/or screws are normally used to fix the patellar fragments together internally. Thereafter, the
                   knee is casted, or early motion of the knee is started.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of patella; severe degenerative arthritis of patellofemoral joint

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Anterior over patella

                     Special                Wire, pins, screws as necessary
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Intraop radiographs may be obtained; tourniquet
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 24 h (vancomycin or clindamycin for 24 h if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time          1.5–2 h

                     Closing                Splint or cast usually applied.
                       considerations

                                                                                                                                                      Orthopedic Surgery
                     EBL                    < 100 mL

                     Mortality              < 1%

                     Morbidity              Late degenerative arthritis of patellofemoral joint: ~50–60%
                                            DVT: ~5%
                                            Wound infection, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis: ~5%
                                            Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: ~2–5%
                                            Knee stiffness: Common
                                            Weakness: Common
                                            Avascular necrosis: Rare
                                            Complex regional pain syndrome: Rare
                                            Following patellectomy—quadriceps strength: ~75% of normal

                     Pain score             7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Any age; frequently seen in young, active, healthy adults.

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              ~1% of all skeletal injuries

                     Etiology               Trauma: falls (60%); motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents (25–35%); industrial injury (6%);
                                            degenerative arthritis of patellofemoral joint (rare)

===== PAGE 1042 =====
1042   c h a p t e r 10.5     Knee Surgery

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Callaghan JJ, O’rourke MR, Saleh KJ. Why knees fail: lessons learned. J Arthroplasty 2004; 19(4 Suppl 1):31–4.
                                      2. Dy CL, Little MT, Berkes MB, et al: Meta-analysis of re-operation, nonunion, and infection after open reduction and internal
                                         fixation of patella fractures. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012; 73(4):928–32.
                                      3. Melvin JS, Mehta S: Patellar fractures in adults. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2011; 19(4):198–207.

                                    REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION OF KNEE LIGAMENTS
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Collateral ligaments usually are repaired by direct suture or by stapling the torn ligaments to bone. Cru-
                                    ciate tears are generally repaired only if bone is avulsed at one end of the ligament, again with direct suture, staples, or
                                    screws. For collateral ligament repair, a longitudinal incision is made directly over the ligament medially or laterally.
                                    The ligament is exposed by deep dissection and elevation of skin flaps. The torn ligament is repaired by direct suture
                                    or by fixing it to bone with a screw or staple. Following closure, the knee is immobilized with a long leg splint or cast.
                                    Cruciate ligaments are repaired in similar fashion, except for the approaches: medial parapatellar (with anterior ar-
                                    throtomy) for the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and posteromedial (with posterior arthrotomy) for the posterior
                                    cruciate ligament (PCL). Cruciate ligament reconstruction is performed for instability 2° intrasubstance tears of these
                                    ligaments. Homografts, such as a portion of the patellar tendon or semitendinosus tendon, normally are used, but al-
                                    lografts or synthetics also are available. (The ligaments of the knee are illustrated in Figs. 10.5-1 and 10.5-2.)
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma

                                                 Medial epicondyle
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                                                                    Lateral epicondyle

                                                                                                                                    Anterior cruciate ligament

                                           Medial condyle of femur                                                                  Lateral condyle of femur

                                                                                                                                    Anterior and posterior
                                                                                                                                    meniscofemoral ligaments
                                                  Medial meniscus                                                                   Lateral meniscus

                                        Posterior cruciate ligament
                                                                                                                                    Fibular collateral ligament
                                                                                                                                    Posterior ligaments of the
                                           Tibial collateral ligament                                                               head of the fibula

                                                                                                                                    Head of the fibula

                                                               Tibia

                                              Figure 10.5-1. The cruciate ligaments (posterior view). (Reused with permission
                                              from Clemente CD. Clemente’s Dissector, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                              Baltimore: 2007, 270.)

===== PAGE 1043 =====
Prepatellar bursa

                                           Patella

                                 Fibrous capsule

                                   Lateral condyle                                                                          Medial condyle
                                   of femur                                                                                 of femur

                                 Anterior cruciate                                                                          Posterior cruciate
                                 ligament                                                                                   ligament

                                 Infrapatellar fold
                                 (over ligament)                                                                            Medial meniscus
                             Infrapatellar fat pad
                                                                                                                            Alar folds

                                                                                                                            Patella

                                                                                                                            Prepatellar bursa

                                Figure 10.5-2. The knee joint opened anteriorly. (Reused with permission from Clemente
                                CD. Clemente’s Dissector, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore: 2007, 269.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                      Repair or Collateral Reconstruction             Repair or Cruciate Reconstruction

                     Position                         Supine                                          ⇐

                     Incision                         Over collateral ligament                        Anterior and lateral ACL or medial PCL

                                                                                                                                                        Orthopedic Surgery
                     Special instrumentation          Staples                                         Drill guides, staples, screws

                     Unique considerations            Often arthroscopically assisted; tourniquet     ⇐

                     Antibiotics                      Cefazolin 1 g iv (vancomycin or clindamycin     ⇐
                                                      if penicillin allergic)

                     Surgical time                    2h                                              ⇐

                     Closing considerations           Splint or cast while anesthetized               ⇐

                     EBL                              100 mL                                          ⇐

                     Postop care                      PACU → room or home                             ⇐

                     Mortality                        Minimal                                         ⇐

                     Morbidity                        Infection: < 1%                                 ⇐

                                                      Thrombophlebitis: < 5%                          ⇐

                     Pain score                       4                                               7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                  Young adult

                     Male:Female                2:1

                     Incidence                  Common

                     Etiology                   Trauma: 100%

===== PAGE 1044 =====
1044   c h a p t e r 10.5     Knee Surgery

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Dwyer T, Whelan D: Anatomical considerations in multiligament knee injury and surgery. J Knee Surg 2012; 25(4):263–74.
                                      2. McCulloch PC, Lattermann C, Boland AL, et al: An illustrated history of anterior cruciate ligament surgery. J Knee Surg 2007;
                                         20(2):95–104.
                                      3. Siegel L, Vandenakker-Albanese C, Siegel D: Anterior cruciate ligament injuries: anatomy, physiology, biomechanics, and
                                         management. Clin J Sport Med 2012; 22(4):349–55.
                                      4. Tjoumakaris FP, Herz-Brown AL, Bowers AL, Sennett BJ, Bernstein J: Complications in brief: anterior cruciate ligament
                                         reconstruction. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2012; 470(2):630–6.

                                    PATELLAR REALIGNMENT
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: The goal of this procedure is prevention of chronic subluxation or dislocation of the patella. Soft-tissue
                                    components of the surgery include incision (release) of the lateral patellar retinaculum and reefing or tightening of
                                    the medial retinaculum (Fig. 10.5-3). In cases of severe malalignment of the extensor mechanism, the insertion of
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                              Figure 10.5-3. Outer layer of anteromedial aspect of the knee joint. Shows anatomy of the
                                              patellar retinaculum. (Reproduced with permission from Hoppenfeld S, deBoer P: Surgical
                                              Exposures in Orthopaedics: The Anatomic Approach. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1994.)

===== PAGE 1045 =====
Patellar Realignment    1045

                   the patellar tendon may be moved to a new, more medial location (tibial tubercle transfer). In this procedure, the
                   tibial tubercle generally is detached with a saw or osteotomes, leaving a bone pedicle attached distally. The tubercle
                   is then rotated medially on the pedicle and fixed in its new position with a screw. Many surgeons routinely perform
                   an anterior compartment fasciotomy to prevent postop compartment syndrome.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic patellar subluxation or dislocation

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                               Patellar Realignment                                               Tibial Tubercle Transfer

                     Position                  Supine                                                             ⇐

                     Incision                  Anteromedial or anterolateral to knee                              ⇐

                     Special                   None                                                               Screws or staples
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                    Tourniquet                                                         ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv (vancomycin or clindamycin if penicillin          ⇐
                                               allergic)

                     Surgical time             1h                                                                 1.5 h

                     Closing                   None                                                               Splint or cast while anesthetized
                       considerations

                     EBL                       50 mL                                                              100 mL

                     Postop care               PACU → room or home                                                ⇐

                     Mortality                 Minimal                                                            ⇐

                     Morbidity                 Hemarthrosis: 100%                                                 5%
                                               Redislocation: 20%                                                 25%
                                               Thrombophlebitis: 10–20%                                           ⇐
                                               Compartment syndrome: < 1%                                         ⇐

                                                                                                                                                              Orthopedic Surgery
                                               Infection: < 1%                                                    ⇐

                     Pain score                6                                                                  7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 Usually young adult

                     Male:Female               1:2

                     Etiology                  Trauma (70%); congenital (30%)

                     Associated                Patellofemoral dysplasia (60–70%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Colvin AC, West RV: Patellar instability. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008; 90(12):2751–62.
                     2. Feller JA: Distal realignment (tibial tuberosity transfer). Sports Med Arthrosc 2012; 20(3):152–61.

===== PAGE 1046 =====
1046   c h a p t e r 10.5    Knee Surgery

                                    ARTHROSCOPY OF THE KNEE
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Knee arthroscopy is used to diagnose and treat intraarticular problems, most commonly torn me-
                                    niscus, but the procedure is also used for ligament injuries (Figs. 10.5-1 and 10.5-2), osteochondral fractures, loose
                                    bodies, arthritis, and infections. In knee arthroscopy, multiple portals or entry points for the arthroscope and instru-
                                    ments generally are used. The most common portals are anteromedial and anterolateral adjacent to the patellar liga-
                                    ment. Other portals may be suprapatellar, parapatellar, and posterior. Portals are made by making a stab wound with
                                    a knife and then entering the joint with a combination of sharp and blunt trochars. A diagnostic inspection from one
                                    of the anterior portals is normally performed at the outset. A second portal is used with a nerve hook to manipulate
                                    intraarticular tissues. If resection or repair is performed, the appropriate instruments are inserted through one of the
                                    portals. Meniscus repair and cruciate reconstruction may require separate longitudinal incisions, which are usually
                                    posteromedial or posterolateral, for placement of sutures and/or drill holes.
                                    Meniscectomy and/or debridement often are performed in conjunction with arthroscopy. Cruciate ligament re-
                                    construction usually is performed with arthroscopic assistance. At the end of the procedure, the knee joint is copi-
                                    ously irrigated with NS or LR solution through one of the portals. Portals are closed with a single suture and Steri-
                                    Strips; compression bandages are applied; and often a knee immobilizer is used.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Torn meniscus; cruciate ligament tear; arthritis

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                                   Cruciate
                                                             Arthroscopy                           Meniscectomy/Debridement        Reconstruction

                                     Position                Supine                                ⇐                               ⇐

                                     Incision                3–4.5 cm portals                      ⇐                               ⇐ + anterior midline
                                                                                                                                   and lateral

                                     Special                 Arthroscopic video system;            ⇐ + shaver                      ⇐ + drill guides and
                                       instrumentation       small biters and graspers                                             drills; fixation screws
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Unique                  Thigh holder; foot of table 90°;      ⇐                               ⇐
                                       considerations        ± tourniquet

                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv (vancomycin or       ⇐                               ⇐
                                                             clindamycin if penicillin allergic)

                                     Surgical time           0.5 h                                 1–2 h                           2–3 h

                                     Closing                 No splint; local anesthetic           ⇐                               ⇐
                                       considerations        injected

                                     EBL                     Minimal                               ⇐                               50 mL

                                     Postop care             PACU → home                           ⇐                               ⇐ or overnight

                                     Mortality               < 0.1%                                ⇐                               ⇐

                                     Morbidity               Hemarthrosis: 5–20%                   5%                              ⇐
                                                             Thrombophlebitis: < 2%                ⇐                               ⇐
                                                             Infection: 0.1%                       ⇐                               ⇐
                                                             Stiffness: < 0.1%                     < 4%                            ⇐

                                     Pain score              3                                     4                               6

===== PAGE 1047 =====
Knee Arthrotomy        1047

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                10–70 yr (usually 20–40 yr)

                     Male:Female              2:1

                     Incidence                The most common arthroscopic procedure (85% of total)

                     Etiology                 Trauma (~85%); arthritis (~10%); infection (~5%)

                     Associated               Usually healthy; systemic arthritis (< 5%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Gwathmey FW Jr, Golish SB, Diduch DR: Complications in brief: meniscus repair. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2012; 470(7):
                        2059–66.
                     2. Minas T: A primer in cartilage repair. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl A):141–6.
                     3. Silvis ML, Clinch CR, Tillett JS, et al: Clinical inquiries. What is the best way to evaluate an acute traumatic knee injury?
                        J Fam Pract 2008; 57(2):116–8.

                   KNEE ARTHROTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Arthrotomy of the knee is the opening of the joint for drainage, excision of intraarticular tissue
                   (synovium, meniscus, loose bodies), ligament repair/reconstruction, or fracture fixation. The knee generally is

                                                                                                                                                                Orthopedic Surgery
                   opened with a parapatellar incision, either medial or lateral, and the joint capsule is incised just adjacent to the pa-
                   tella. After the intraarticular pathology is addressed, a tight capsular closure is performed, followed by subcutaneous
                   tissue and skin closure.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Arthrotomy with debridement may be used for infection or arthropathy
                   which produces debris. In both cases, synovectomy may be necessary.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Infection; trauma (fracture, sprain, torn meniscus); arthritis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                    Arthrotomy with          Arthrotomy with
                                              Arthrotomy                                            Debridement              Synovectomy

                     Position                 Supine                                                ⇐                        ⇐

                     Incision                 Medial or lateral parapatellar                        ⇐                        ⇐

                     Special                  Tourniquet                                            ⇐                        ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv (vancomycin or clindamycin if        ⇐                        ⇐
                                              penicillin allergic)

===== PAGE 1048 =====
1048   c h a p t e r 10.5   Knee Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                              Arthrotomy with       Arthrotomy with
                                                             Arthrotomy                                       Debridement           Synovectomy

                                     Surgical time           1h                                               2h                    2h

                                     Closing                 Compressive dressing; may be splinted; suction   ⇐                     ⇐
                                       considerations        drain

                                     EBL                     100 mL                                           ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Postop care             PACU → room                                      ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Mortality               Minimal                                          ⇐                     ⇐

                                     Morbidity               Hemarthrosis: 100%                               ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             Degenerative arthritis: 5–20%                    ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             Stiffness: 5%                                    ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             Thrombophlebitis: 5%                             ⇐                     ⇐
                                                             Infection: 1 %                                   10%                   20%

                                     Pain score              7                                                7                     8

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range               Infant–elderly (usually young adult)

                                     Male:Female             1:1

                                     Incidence               Common

                                     Etiology                Infection; trauma; arthritis

                                     Associated              Inflammatory arthritis (20%)
                                       conditions
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Knee Procedures (p. 1049).

                                    REPAIR OF TENDONS—KNEE AND LEG
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Acute ruptures of tendons in the lower limb are repaired by direct suture and sometimes reinforced
                                    with part of another tendon. At the knee, patellar tendon ruptures are most common; at the ankle, Achilles tendon
                                    ruptures are most common. A longitudinal incision generally is made directly over the tendon. The tendon sheath
                                    is opened, and tendon ends reapproximated with a nonabsorbable tendon stitch. If necessary, the repair may be
                                    augmented by synthetic tape or fascia or protected with a wire that takes tension off the repair. The tendon sheath is
                                    closed separately from the skin incision, and a cast or splint is applied. Achilles tendon repair and posterior tibial
                                    tendon repair require different positioning. For an Achilles tendon repair, the patient is placed prone, and a longi-
                                    tudinal incision is made just medial to the tendon, spanning the rupture. The tendon sheath is incised and carefully
                                    protected. Torn ends of the tendon are approximated with multiple tendon stitches and may be protected with a
                                    fascial flap developed from the gastrocnemius fascia. The tendon sheath is closed carefully, followed by skin wound
                                    closure. A splint or cast is applied with the foot in equinus (plantar flexion).

===== PAGE 1049 =====
Repair of Tendons—Knee and Leg     1049

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Tendon rupture

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Posterior Tendon Repair                                        Achilles Tendon Repair

                     Position              Supine                                                         Prone

                     Incision              Over tendon                                                    ⇐

                     Special               Wire or synthetic tape for augmentation                        ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                Tourniquet                                                     ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv (vancomycin or clindamycin if penicillin      ⇐
                                           allergic)

                     Surgical time         1h                                                             ⇐

                     Closing               Splint or cast while anesthetized                              ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                   Minimal                                                        ⇐

                     Postop care           PACU → room or home                                            ⇐

                     Mortality             Minimal                                                        ⇐

                     Morbidity             Weakness: ~10%                                                 ⇐
                                           Wound slough: 5%                                               ⇐
                                           Adhesions: < 1%                                                ⇐
                                           Infection: < 1%                                                ⇐
                                                                                                          Rerupture: 5–10%

                     Pain score            3                                                              3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                  Orthopedic Surgery
                     Age range             Any age

                     Male:Female           1:1

                     Incidence             Uncommon

                     Etiology              Trauma (90%); chronic tendinitis (10%)

                     Associated            Obesity; diabetes mellitus (DM); inflammatory arthritis
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR KNEE PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: arthroplasty; arthrodesis; ORIF of patellar fractures; repair/reconstruction of liga-
                   ments; patellar realignment; arthroscopy; arthrotomy; tendon repair—knee and leg)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Trauma and osteoarthritis (OA) are the most common indications for these procedures. Trauma patients (e.g., those
                   with sports injuries) are often young and healthy, whereas arthritic patients are often elderly, and anesthetic man-
                   agement must be tailored to any concurrent disease. Patients with rheumatoid and other inflammatory arthritides
                   form another group of candidates for these procedures; the special anesthetic considerations for these patients are
                   described in Anesthetic Considerations for Hip Procedures, p. 1023. A final group of patients undergoing these

===== PAGE 1050 =====
1050   c h a p t e r 10.5    Knee Surgery

                                    procedures are hemophiliacs, who develop arthritis from recurrent bleeding into their joints. The hematologic man-
                                    agement of these patients is discussed below.

                                    Respiratory               These patients often have rheumatoid arthritis and associated pulmonary conditions. For
                                                              example, pulmonary effusions are common. Limited respiratory reserve warrants further
                                                              evaluation. Pulmonary fibrosis (rare) often manifests as a cough and dyspnea. Rheumatoid
                                                              arthritis involving the cricoarytenoid joints may manifest as hoarseness, glottic narrowing,
                                                              and difficult intubation. Arthritic involvement of the TMJ and cervical spine may further
                                                              complicate airway management.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular            The severity of the arthritis often limits exercise and makes assessment of cardiovascular sta-
                                                              tus difficult. Dobutamine stress ECHO, and dipyridamole thallium imaging may be necessary
                                                              for an adequate cardiac evaluation. Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with pericardial effu-
                                                              sion, cardiac valve fibrosis, cardiac conduction abnormalities and aortic regurgitation (AR).
                                                              Tests: ECG and others as indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological              In arthritic patients, a thorough preop neurological exam often yields evidence of cervical nerve
                                                              root compression. After the stability of the neck has been established, the full range of neck
                                                              motion should be evaluated for evidence of nerve compression or cerebral ischemia (suggest-
                                                              ing vertebral artery compression). Consider preop lateral neck films to determine stability of
                                                              atlantooccipital joint and evidence of vertebral spurs that may interfere with intubation.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Musculoskeletal           Pain and ↓ joint mobility may make positioning and regional anesthesia difficult in this
                                                              patient population.

                                    Hematologic               Hemophiliacs require restoration of clotting factors preop. Administer 1 U of factor con-
                                                              centrate/kg body weight for each 2% increase necessary to achieve clotting factor activity of
                                                              40% normal. FFP contains l U/mL and cryoprecipitate 20 U/mL. Hemophilia B (Factor IX
                                                              deficiency), but not hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency), can be treated with prothrom-
                                                              bin complex concentrate; however, these products can activate clotting factors and → DIC.
                                                              Approximately 10% of hemophiliacs develop antibodies to exogenous clotting factors, and
                                                              the care of these patients should be guided by a hematologist.
                                                              Tests: Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication             Standard premedication (see p. B-1). Preop patellar pain is treated effectively with a femo-
                                                              ral nerve block at the inguinal ligament, using 10 mL of lidocaine 1.5% with epinephrine
                                                              1:200,000. Consider preemptive analgesia with: gabapentin 600 mg po, celecoxib (Celebrex®)
                                                              200 mg po, and acetaminophen 1 g po/iv to be given in the preop holding area.

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: For many of these patients, regional anesthesia may be the preferred technique, offering the
                                    advantages of ↓ blood loss, ↓ DVT, minimal respiratory impairment, and effective postop analgesia. Patients with
                                    rheumatoid arthritis rarely have involvement of the lumbar spine. Because rheumatoid arthritis frequently affects
                                    the C-spine, however, these patients may have limited range of neck motion, an unstable atlantooccipital joint, and
                                    cricoarytenoid and TMJ arthritis. Careful airway evaluation, therefore, is important to determine the appropriate-
                                    ness of special intubation techniques (e.g., fiberoptic).
                                    Regional anesthesia: A continuous peripheral nerve block (CPNB) provides similar effect on postop length of hos-
                                    pital stay and rehabilitation compared to an epidural pain management but has a lower incidence of side effects (uri-
                                    nary retention, hypotension, and dysesthesia). A combined femoral and sciatic nerve block provides superior pain
                                    control in the first 36 postoperative hours over a single, femoral nerve block. In addition to the nerve block, either a
                                    GA or an SAB is needed for the intraoperative phase because a CPNB does not reliably provide surgical anesthesia.
                                    Both nerves can be localized conventionally using a nerve stimulator or with ultrasound guidance. A typical initial
                                    local anesthesia dose for each nerve is 20 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine. As an alternative, a continu-
                                    ous adductor canal (lower femoral nerve) block can be used to provide minimal motor blockade while maintaining

===== PAGE 1051 =====
Repair of Tendons—Knee and Leg            1051

                   good analgesia. A bolus of 30 mL of 0.5% ropivacaine with epinephrine 1:200,000 is used, and a continuous infusion
                   (0.2% at 10 mL/h) started in the recovery room. There are emerging data supporting the safe and efficacious use of
                   adductor canal blocks/indwelling catheters and local infiltration of analgesics in total knee arthroplasty. Currently
                   this is our preferred approach, in combination with a general anesthetic, for total knee arthroplasty.
                   An epidural block provides both intraop surgical anesthesia and postop pain control but it is contraindicated in
                   patients receiving Coumadin postop. If the patient prefers not to receive a peripheral nerve or an epidural block, a
                   subarachnoid block provides a useful alternative regional anesthesia technique, depending on the patient population
                   (e.g., younger patients may be at ↑ risk of spinal headache following SAB). Anesthesia extending from S2 to T12 (T8,
                   if tourniquet is used) is adequate for knee surgery. Full motor blockade is essential for fixation of the patella or place-
                   ment of the joint prosthesis and assessment of the passive ROM of the prosthesis. Typical drugs and doses include:
                   subarachnoid—12.5–15 mg of 0.75% bupivacaine with morphine 0.2 mg; epidural—15–20 mL 2% lidocaine with
                   epinephrine 1:200,000 in divided doses.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate for patients with normal airways.

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Neuromuscular relaxation facilitates the placement of
                                              the prosthesis. Hemophiliacs will require infusion of clotting factors. For hemophilia A and
                                              von Willebrand’s disease, 1.5 U/kg/h; for hemophilia B, 0.75 U/kg/h. Maintain normother-
                                              mia (forced air blanket), and use fluid warmer.

                    Emergence                 The tourniquet is deflated around the time of emergence. In patients with moderate-to-
                                              severe lung disease, controlled ventilation should be continued until after the lactic acid
                                              that has accumulated in the leg has been metabolized (3–5 min) because these patients
                                              may be unable to increase ventilation to buffer this acid load. Provide PONV prophylaxis
                                              with ondansetron 4 mg.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 14–16 ga × 1                         A tourniquet blocks intraop blood loss. When it is
                       requirements           NS/LR @ maintenance during the           deflated, prepare for a 1–2 U blood loss over the en-
                                              case, and 5–10 mL/kg bolus prior         suing h; more if the posterior tibial artery has been
                                              to tourniquet deflation                  damaged in the dissection. Avoid underresuscitation.

                    Control of blood          Tourniquet                               Inflation pressure is typically 100 mm Hg + systolic
                      loss                                                             pressure. Maximum tourniquet time is 2 h, fol-

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                                                                                       lowed by a 30 min reperfusion interval, if further
                                                                                       tourniquet time is necessary.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                              ± CVP line                               A CVP line is indicated if monitoring the CVP
                                                                                       trend is expected to affect anesthetic care.
                                              ± Arterial line                          Additional monitoring (CVO2Sat, PA cath, TEE)
                                                                                       may be indicated in special cases.

                    Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points                In rheumatoid arthritic patients, meticulous pad-
                                              ✓ eyes                                   ding of the extremities is mandatory.

                    Complications             Posterior tibial artery trauma            A 20% ↓ MAP is common on tourniquet deflation.
                                              Peroneal nerve palsy                      Additional crystalloid (5–10 mL/kg) may be
                                                                                       necessary to replace edema fluid and blood loss to
                                                                                        the leg.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Hemorrhage from the posterior tib-       ✓ surgical drain output
                                              ial artery
                                              Peroneal nerve palsy → foot drop         Examine patient for evidence of neurologic dys-
                                                                                       function and notify surgeons as necessary.
                                              Tourniquet-related nerve injury          PTS is a self-limiting condition in which the affected
                                              Posttourniquet syndrome (PTS)            limb is edematous, pale, and weak.

===== PAGE 1052 =====
1052   c h a p t e r 10.5      Knee Surgery

                                    Pain                         Neuraxial regimens:
                                      management                 • Epidural anesthesia                        Epidural bupivacaine 0.0125% infused at 6–8 mL/h
                                                                                                              with hydromorphone 50 mcg/mL infused at 100–
                                                                                                              250 mcg/h provides good analgesia.
                                                                                                              Prior to removal of the epidural catheter a 0.2-mg
                                                                                                              bolus of hydromorphone may be given. Epidural
                                                                                                              catheters are typically removed on the morning of
                                                                                                              postop day 2. Low-molecular-weight heparin may
                                                                                                              be started 2 h after catheter removal.
                                                                 • SAB                                        Intrathecal morphine 0.2–0.3 mg provides analgesia
                                                                                                              for up to 24 h. May be administered along with bupi-
                                                                                                              vacaine for surgical anesthesia.
                                                                 Peripheral regimens:
                                                                 • Single-shot peripheral nerve block        These nerves may be blocked preop or postop as a pain
                                                                    (femoral or combined femoral/sci-         rescue measure. A typical dose for each nerve is 20 mL
                                                                    atic block)                               of 0.5% bupivacaine or 30 mL of 0.5% ropivacaine.
                                                                 • CPNB                                       Continuous infusion of bupivacaine 0.125%
                                                                                                              through standard or portable infusion pumps at
                                                                                                              6–10 mL/h. Anticoagulation may continue with a
                                                                                                              peripheral nerve catheter in place. Catheter is re-
                                                                                                              moved on POD#2 at the latest. Foley catheters are
                                                                                                              not required with peripheral nerve catheters.
                                                                 Systemic regimens:                           Oral pain management with acetaminophen
                                                                                                              (1 g every 6 h if not contraindictated) should be
                                                                                                              continued immediately postop. Celecoxib (Celebrex®)
                                                                                                               200 mg once a day. Oxycodone 5–20 mg po q 2 h
                                                                                                               PRN. Morphine 0.5–2 iv mg q 3 h PRN. Consider
                                                                                                               pain service consult as well as the use of controlled-
                                                                                                               release oxycodone (OxyContin®) and PCA with iv
                                                                                                               morphine or hydromorphone in opioid dependent
                                                                                                               patients, as an alternative to neuraxial blocks or to
                                                                                                               supplement peripheral nerve blocks.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Tests                        Hct; other studies as indicated              Patients with coagulopathies require replacement
                                                                                                              therapy for 6–10 d.

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Barrack RL: Current guidelines for total joint VTE prophylaxis: dawn of a new day. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl A):3–7.
                                      2. Bono JV, Robbins CE, Mehio AK, Aghazadeh M, Talmo CT: Pharmacologic pain management before and after total joint
                                         replacement of the hip and knee. Clin Geriatr Med 2012; 28(3):459–70.
                                      3. Fowler SJ, Symons J, Sabato S, et al: Epidural analgesia compared with peripheral nerve blockade after major knee surgery: a
                                         systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Br J Anaesth 2008; 100(2):154–64.
                                      4. Ganapathy S: Wound/intra-articular infiltration or peripheral nerve blocks for orthopedic joint surgery: efficacy and safety
                                         issues. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(5):615–20.
                                      5. Gibbs DM, Green TP, Esler CN: The local infiltration of analgesia following total knee replacement: a review of current
                                         literature. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012; 94(9):1154–9.
                                      6. Hebl J: Clinical pathways for total joint arthroplasty: essential components for success. Refresher Course Lect Anesthesiol
                                         2012; 324:1–10.
                                      7. Hebl JR, Dilger JA, Byer DE, et al: A pre-emptive multimodal pathway featuring peripheral nerve block improves perioperative
                                         outcomes after major orthopedic surgery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2008; 33(6):510–17.
                                      8. Jæger P, Zaric D, Fomsgaard JS, et al: Adductor canal block versus femoral nerve block for analgesia after total knee
                                         arthroplasty: a randomized, double-blind study. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2013; 38(6):526–32.
                                      9. Johnson RL, Kopp SL, Hebl JR, Erwin PJ, Mantilla CB: Falls and major orthopaedic surgery with peripheral nerve blockade: a
                                         systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(4):518–28.
                                     10. Kuper M, Rosenstein A: Infection control in total knee and total hip arthroplasties. Am J Orthop 2008; 37(1):E2–5.
                                     11. Mudumbai SC, Kim TE, Howard SK, et al: Continuous adductor canal blocks are superior to continuous femoral nerve blocks
                                         in promoting early ambulation after TKA. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2013. [Epub ahead of print].
                                     12. Scuderi GR: Preoperative planning and perioperative management for minimally invasive total knee arthroplasty. Am J
                                         Orthop 2006; 35(7 Suppl):4–6.
                                     13. Watts CD, Pagnano MW: Minimising blood loss and transfusion in contemporary hip and knee arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg
                                         Br 2012; 94(11 Suppl A):8–10.

===== PAGE 1053 =====
Repair of Tendons—Knee and Leg     1053

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Total Knee Replacement Surgery by Dr. Eric W. Janssen: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GRSWV57u9eg
                   Knee Arthroscopy: Portal Placement and Examination Course: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=thlpKv9XftA
                   Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) Reconstruction Animation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q96M0jRqn7k
                   Knee Ligament Anatomy Animation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RTV5Yo3E7VQ
                   Continous Adductor Canal (Saphenous Nerve) Block: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDI0WVW3omY
                   Continuous Femoral Nerve Block: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkfWm0XPTMo

                                                                                                                                    Orthopedic Surgery

===== PAGE 1054 =====
c h a p t e r

                          10.6 Lower Leg, Ankle,
                                           Foot, and Other
                                           Lower-Extremity
                                           Procedures

                                           surgeon
                                           John J. Csongradi, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Frederick G. Mihm, MD
                                           Pedro P. Tanaka, MD

===== PAGE 1056 =====
OPEN REDUCTION AND INTERNAL FIXATION (ORIF) OF
                                    THE TIBIAL PLATEAU FRACTURE
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: ORIF of the tibial plateau or proximal tibia fracture involves making a longitudinal incision along the
                                    proximal leg, lateral to the knee, obtaining a reduction by direct visualization of the fracture fragments, and applying
                                    plates and screws along the tibia for rigid internal fixation. An iliac crest bone graft may be necessary. A proximal
                                    tibial osteotomy involves correcting malalignment (valgus and varus) of the lower extremity by excising a wedge of
                                    bone from the tibia and correcting the mechanical axis.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Tibial plateau or proximal tibial fracture; nonunion/malunion of the tibial plateau or proxi-
                                    mal tibia; degenerative arthritis of the knee, with varus or valgus deformity

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                    ORIF Tibial Plateau Fracture                                  Proximal Tibial Osteotomy

                                     Position                       Supine                                                        ⇐

                                     Incision                       Lateral to knee, usually; medial, rarely                      Transverse or lateral incision

                                     Special instrumentation        Special plates, screws; reduction clamps; radiolucent table   ⇐

                                     Unique considerations          Intraop radiographs or I.I.; tourniquet                       ⇐

                                     Antibiotics                    Cefazolin or cefamandole 1 g iv q 6–8 h × 48 h                ⇐

                                     Surgical time                  ~2.5–3 h; more, depending on difficulty                       ⇐

                                     Closing considerations         Splint, cast while anesthetized                               ⇐

                                     EBL                            < 200 mL                                                      ⇐

                                     Postop care                    Multiple-trauma victim → ICU; others → PACU; ± CPM            PACU → ward
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Mortality                      Rare, except in severe multiple trauma                        None

                                     Morbidity                      Compartment syndrome: 10–20%                                  < 25%
                                                                    Wound infection: 7–15%                                        ~2%
                                                                    DVT (symptomatic): 3–5%                                       2%
                                                                    Delayed union, nonunion, malunion: < 5%                       ⇐
                                                                    Peripheral nerve damage: 3%                                   0.2%
                                                                    Intraarticular fracture: 2%
                                                                    Hypotension (multiple trauma)
                                                                    Leg-length discrepancy
                                                                    Osteomyelitis, septic arthritis
                                                                    Respiratory distress and fat embolism
                                                                    Vascular complications

                                     Pain score                     7                                                             7

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                Any age; fracture most common in younger trauma patients and elderly
                                                              Degenerative arthritis of knee, < 60 yr

                                     Male:Female              1:1

                                     Incidence                Common

                                     Etiology                 Trauma: falls, motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents, industrial injuries
                                                              Degenerative: arthritis of knee

                             1056

===== PAGE 1057 =====
intramedullary nailing, tibia     1057

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Atesok K, Doral MN, Whipple T, et al: Arthroscopy-assisted fracture fixation. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc
                        2011; 19(2):320–9.
                     2. Thomas CH, Athanasiov A, Wullschleger M, Schuetz M: Current concepts in tibial plateau fractures. Acta Chir Orthop
                        Traumatol Cech 2009; 76(5):363–73.

                   INTRAMEDULLARY NAILING, TIBIA
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: In intramedullary nailing of the tibia, a metal nail is placed into the medullary canal of the tibia to stabi-
                   lize (or prevent) a fracture. The affected leg generally is placed in traction, on a fracture table, via stirrup or calcaneal
                   pin. Following the incision, an awl is used to make an entry hole in the proximal metaphysis of the tibia, through which
                   a guide wire is introduced. The guide wire is placed across the aligned fracture, and the nail is introduced and driven
                   over the guide wire. Before nail insertion, the medullary canal often is reamed to allow use of a larger nail. Most nails
                   are interlocked both proximally and distally with screws that pass from the bone through holes in the nail.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture, nonunion or malunion of the tibia

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, on fracture table. Consider inducing anesthesia before moving patient.

                     Incision                Proximal longitudinal incision over the patellar tendon; stab wound for screws

                     Special                 Nails, screws, and insertion instruments; intramedullary reamers; I.I.
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                                                                                                                                           Orthopedic Surgery
                     Surgical time           2h

                     Closing                 No splint or cast
                       considerations

                     EBL                     200 mL

                     Postop care             PACU → room

                     Mortality               Minimal

                     Morbidity               Compartment syndrome: < 5%
                                             Infection: < 2%
                                             Neuropraxia: < 1 %

                     Pain score              5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               > 16 yr

                     Male:Female             5:1

                     Etiology                Trauma (95%); tumor (5%)

                     Associated              Multiple trauma (50%); compartment syndrome (5%)
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1058 =====
1058   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    EXTERNAL FIXATION, TIBIA
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Fractures of the tibia are fixed with percutaneous pins that are clamped to an external frame. Stain-
                                    less steel pins are drilled into the proximal and distal fragments of the fracture through stab wounds in the skin and
                                    subcutaneous tissues. Usually 2–3 pins are placed on either side of the fracture. Pin clamps and an external frame are
                                    attached and the fracture aligned with the assistance of the I.I. or under direct vision. Following fracture alignment,
                                    the pin clamps and frames are tightened to hold fracture alignment. External fixation is often used with open frac-
                                    tures. Small-pin fixators (e.g., Ilizarov) are used for fracture fixation, leg lengthening, and treatment of bony defects.
                                    Wound irrigation and debridement often accompany application of the fixation frame.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Tibial fracture; tibial nonunion or malunion; tibial shortening

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                 Supine

                                     Incision                 Stab wounds. Small-pin fixator may require metaphyseal incision for osteotomy.

                                     Special                  Pins; fixation frame; I.I.
                                       instrumentation

                                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                     Surgical time            0.5–1 h
                                                              Small-pin fixator: 3–5 h

                                     Closing                  May be open fracture (usually left open)
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                       considerations

                                     EBL                      50 mL; small-pin fixator, 100 mL

                                     Postop care              PACU → room

                                     Mortality                Minimal

                                     Morbidity                Infection: 15%
                                                              Compartment syndrome: < 2%
                                                              Neuropraxia: < 1%

                                     Pain score               2–3

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                All ages

                                     Male:Female              5:1

                                     Incidence                Common

                                     Etiology                 Trauma (95%); shortened limb (< 2%); ununited or malunited fracture (< 2%)

                                     Associated               Open fracture (95%); compartment syndrome (< 2%); congenital anomaly (< 1%)
                                       conditions

===== PAGE 1059 =====
open reduction and internal fixation (oRIF) of distal tibia, ankle, and foot fractures              1059

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   OPEN REDUCTION AND INTERNAL FIXATION (ORIF) OF
                   DISTAL TIBIA, ANKLE, AND FOOT FRACTURES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: ORIF is nearly always required for displaced fractures involving the ankle or joints in the foot. A lon-
                   gitudinal incision is made over the fractured medial and/or lateral malleoli. Dissection is carried directly down to the
                   bone, and the fracture is identified and reduced under direct vision.
                   Open fractures may require irrigation and debridement. The fractures are realigned under direct vision and fixed
                   and stabilized with pins, plates, and/or screws. An intraop radiograph is obtained to confirm reduction and place-
                   ment of hardware. The incisions are closed and a splint or cast is applied.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture of the distal tibia, ankle, or foot

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                     ORIF Ankle                                            With Irrigation and Debridement

                     Position                        Supine                                                ⇐

                     Incision                        Longitudinal over fracture site                       ⇐ + extension of existing wound

                     Special instrumentation         Pins, plates, and screws; tourniquet; x-ray or I.I.   ⇐

                     Antibiotics                     Cefazolin 1 g iv preop                                ⇐

                     Surgical time                   2h                                                    2–3 h

                                                                                                                                                           Orthopedic Surgery
                     Closing considerations          Splint or cast while anesthetized                     Splint or cast; may leave wound open.

                     EBL                             50 mL                                                 100 mL

                     Postop care                     PACU → room                                           ⇐

                     Mortality                       Minimal                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity                       Wound dehiscence: 10%                                 ⇐
                                                     Loss of reduction: 7%                                 ⇐
                                                     Infection: 3%                                         15%

                     Pain score                      4                                                     4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Infant–elderly (usually > 60 yr)

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                ~ 250,000 cases/yr in the United States

                     Etiology                 Trauma: 100%

                     Associated               Alcohol abuse; obesity; diabetes mellitus (DM)
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1060 =====
1060   c h a p t e r 10.6     Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Mandi DM: Ankle fractures. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 2012; 29(2):155–86, vii.
                                      2. Shindle MK, Endo Y, Warren RF, et al: Stress fractures about the tibia, foot, and ankle. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2012; 20(3):
                                         167–76.

                                    REPAIR NONUNION/MALUNION, TIBIA
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: This procedure is used to treat a fracture that has not healed or was misaligned upon healing. The frac-
                                    ture is mobilized, usually grafted with autogenous or allograft bone, and realigned. With an anterior approach, a longi-
                                    tudinal incision is made anteromedial or anterolateral to the shaft of the tibia. Dissection is carried directly down to the
                                    bone and the nonunion identified. If the tibia is approached with a posterolateral incision, the patient is turned prone
                                    and a longitudinal incision is made just posterior to the fibula. Dissection is carried down posteriorly to the interosse-
                                    ous membrane, to the tibia, and the procedure becomes identical to the anterior approach. Tissue interposed between
                                    the bone ends may or may not be debrided. The cortex of the bone adjacent to the nonunion is roughened with an os-
                                    teotome. Autogenous or allograft bone is placed adjacent to or in the nonunion site. In the case of a malunion, the bone
                                    may be osteotomized with a saw or osteotomes to allow realignment. If skeletal fixation is used, a plate may be attached
                                    to the bone through the same incision. Alternatively, an intramedullary nail may be placed through an incision anterior
                                    to the tibial tubercle. If an intramedullary device is used, the canal may be reamed with intramedullary reamers prior
                                    to placement of the nail. A third type of skeletal fixation is the external fixator that stabilizes the nonunion via per-
                                    cutaneous pins placed into the proximal and distal tibia, which are then spanned by a device with pin clamps at both
                                    ends. An intraop x-ray is often used to confirm fixation and placement of devices; alternatively, an I.I. may be used.
                                    Variant procedure or approaches: Autogenous bone grafting from the iliac crest is commonly used to stimu-
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    late healing. An incision is made directly over the iliac crest, and muscles are stripped from the crest and table of the
                                    ilium. Osteotomes and gouges are used to remove either the inner or outer table of the ilium and cancellous bone
                                    between the two tables. The wound is closed over a suction drain.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Ununited or malunited fracture

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                   Basic Repair                              With Iliac Graft        With Skeletal Fixation

                                     Position                      Supine (prone with posterior lateral      ⇐                       ⇐
                                                                   graft)

                                     Incision                      Anteromedial or posterolateral to         Anteromedial; paral-
                                                                   shaft of tibia                            lel to iliac crest

                                     Special instrumentation       Tourniquet; x-ray or I.I.                 ⇐                       Pins, plates, screws, rods,
                                                                                                                                     external fixator; tourniquet;
                                                                                                                                     x-ray or I.I.

                                     Antibiotics                   Cefazolin 1 g iv preop. (If infected      ⇐                       ⇐
                                                                   nonunion anticipated, antibiotics are
                                                                   withheld until cultures are obtained.)

                                     Surgical time                 2h                                        2.5 h                   3h

===== PAGE 1061 =====
arthroscopy of the ankle        1061

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                                    Basic Repair                           With Iliac Graft       With Skeletal Fixation

                     Closing considerations         Splint or cast applied while           ⇐                      No splint or cast
                                                    anesthetized.

                     EBL                            100 mL                                 200–300 mL             ⇐

                     Postop care                    PACU → room                            ⇐                      ⇐

                     Mortality                      Minimal                                ⇐                      ⇐

                     Morbidity                      Thrombophlebitis: 5%                   ⇐                      ⇐
                                                    Compartment syndrome: 1%               ⇐                      ⇐
                                                    Infection: 1%                          ⇐                      ⇐
                                                    Hematoma: < 1%                         5%                     1–3%

                     Pain score                     5                                      8                      5–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                10–80 yr (usually 20–40 yr)

                     Male:Female              5:1

                     Incidence                5–10% of tibia fractures; 50–75% of open fractures

                     Etiology                 Trauma: 100%

                     Associated               Poor nutrition (50%); infection (10%); metabolic disease (10%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                                                                                                                                            Orthopedic Surgery
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Mechrefe AP, Koh EY, Trafton PG, DiGiovanni CW: Tibial malunion. Foot Ankle Clin 2006; 11(1):19–33, vii.
                     2. Ng A, Barnes ES: Management of complications of open reduction and internal fixation of ankle fractures. Clin Podiatr Med
                        Surg 2009; 26(1):105–25.

                   ARTHROSCOPY OF THE ANKLE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ankle arthroscopy is usually a diagnostic procedure, although it may be used for debridement
                   or removal of loose bodies. The ankle joint generally is inspected through anterolateral and anteromedial
                   portals (entry wounds). Posterolateral and posteromedial portals also may be used. Each portal is made via
                   a 5-mm stab wound in the skin (Fig. 10.6-1); then instrumentation is placed, using trochars. If the ankle joint
                   is tight, a mechanical distractor (external fixator distraction apparatus spanning the ankle joint) may be used.
                   The distractor is attached to the bones via percutaneous pins, as in the case of the application of an external
                   fixator. The portals are closed with sterile tape or a single suture. Debridement may be used to reduce local or
                   generalized articular damage.

===== PAGE 1062 =====
1062   c h a p t e r 10.6       Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                                                                      Great saphenous v.
                                    Extensor
                                    digitorum                                         Saphenous n. branch
                                    longus                                            Tibialis anterior tendon

                                    Branches of                                       Extensor hallucis          Flexor digitorum
                                    superficial                                       longus                     longus tendon
                                    peroneal n.                                       Anterior tibial a.                                            Small saphenous v.
                                                                                                                 Tibialis posterior
                                                                                      Anteromedial               tendon                             Sural n.
                                    Anterocentral
                                                                                      portal                                                        Peroneus brevis
                                    portal                                                                       Posterior tibial a.
                                                                                      Accessory                                                     Peroneus longus
                                                                                                                 Tibial n.                          tendon
                                    Anterolateral                                     anteromedial portal
                                    portal                                                                       Posteromedial
                                                                                      Branches of                portal                             Posterolateral portal
                                    Accessory                                         deep peroneal n.
                                                                                                                 Trans-Achilles                     Accessory
                                    anterolateral
                                                                                                                 portal                             posterolateral portal
                                    portal
                                                                                                                 Flexor hallucis                    Peroneal a.
                                                                                                                 longus tendon                      Tendo calcaneus
                                                                                      Dorsalis pedis a.
                                                                                                                                                    (Achilles tendon)
                                                                                                                 Flexor retinaculum
                                                                                                                                                    Superior peroneal
                                                                                                                                                    retinaculum

                                    A                                                                            B

                                                    Figure 10.6-1. Portals for ankle arthroscopy. A: Anterior anatomy and portals. The
                                                    anterolateral and anteromedial portals are used routinely. B: Posterior anatomy and
                                                    portals. The posterolateral portal also is used routinely. (Redrawn from Ferkel RD:
                                                    Arthroscopic Surgery: The Foot and Ankle. Lippincott-Raven: 1996.)

                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma; infection; arthritis

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                     Arthroscopy                                                       Arthroscopy + Debridement

                                     Position                        Supine                                                            ⇐

                                     Incision                        0.5 cm portals (incisions)                                        ⇐

                                     Special instrumentation         Arthroscopic video system; small biters and graspers              ⇐ + shaver

                                     Unique considerations           ± Tourniquet. May use distractor with pins through tibia          ⇐
                                                                     and calcaneus.

                                     Antibiotics                     Cefazolin 1 g iv preop (optional)                                 ⇐

                                     Surgical time                   1h                                                                1–2 h

                                     Closing considerations          No splint; incisions injected with local anesthetic.              ⇐

                                     EBL                             Minimal                                                           50 mL

                                     Postop care                     PACU → home                                                       ⇐

                                     Mortality                       < 0.01%                                                           ⇐

                                     Morbidity                       Hemarthrosis: 5%                                                  ⇐
                                                                     Thrombophlebitis < 2%                                             ⇐
                                                                     Infection: < 1%                                                   ⇐

                                     Pain score                      2–3                                                               3

===== PAGE 1063 =====
Ankle Arthrotomy       1063

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               12–70 yr (usually 20–40 yr)

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Uncommon

                     Etiology                Trauma (70%); arthritis (20%); infection (5%)

                     Associated              Usually healthy; may have systemic arthritis.
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Glazebrook MA, Ganapathy V, Bridge MA, Stone JW, Allard JP: Evidence-based indications for ankle arthroscopy. Arthroscopy
                        2009; 25(12):1478–90.
                     2. Jennings MM, Bark SE: Practical aspects of foot and ankle arthroscopy. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 2011; 28(3):441–52.
                     3. Lui TH: Arthroscopy and endoscopy of the foot and ankle: indications for new techniques. Arthroscopy 2007; 23(8):889–902.

                   ANKLE ARTHROTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Arthrotomy of the ankle is the opening of the joint for drainage, debridement, or fracture treatment. The
                   joint usually is opened with an anterolateral midline or anteromedial longitudinal incision. Tendons and neurovascular
                   structures are carefully retracted to expose the joint capsule, which is then opened in line with the skin incision. After
                   intraarticular pathology is addressed, careful closure of the capsule is performed, taking care to obtain good hemostasis.

                                                                                                                                                            Orthopedic Surgery
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Infection; trauma; arthritis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Anterior midline or anteromedial longitudinal

                     Special                 Tourniquet
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                     Surgical time           1–2 h

                     Closing                 ± Splint while anesthetized; may have suction drain.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal

                     Postop care             PACU → room

                     Mortality               Minimal

                     Morbidity               Hemarthrosis: 20%
                                             Thrombophlebitis: 5%
                                             Infection: 1%

                     Pain score              5

===== PAGE 1064 =====
1064   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range               Infant–elderly

                                     Male:Female             1:1

                                     Incidence               Rare

                                     Etiology                Trauma (70%); arthritis (20%); infection (10%)

                                     Associated              Inflammatory arthritis; multiple trauma; immunosuppression
                                       conditions

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    ANKLE ARTHRODESIS
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: An ankle fusion may need to be performed for severe pain 2° arthritis of the ankle. In most cases, an
                                    anterior approach is made to the ankle joint. An alternative approach is through the medial malleolus. The ankle joint
                                    is exposed, and the surfaces of the joint are debrided either with osteotomes or a burr. Cancellous bone is exposed
                                    on the distal tibia and talus, and the joint is clamped together either with a simple external fixation device with pins
                                    going through the distal tibia and talus, or with bone screws that go from the distal tibia into the talus. The wound is
                                    closed over a drain, and a splint may be applied.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Arthritis of the ankle

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Position                Supine

                                     Incision                Anterior midline over distal tibia

                                     Special                 Tourniquet; external fixator or bone screws
                                       instrumentation

                                     Unique                  Intraop radiographs; tourniquet use
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                     Surgical time           2h

                                     Closing                 May be splinted; suction drain.
                                       considerations

                                     EBL                     100 mL

                                     Postop care             PACU → room

                                     Mortality               Minimal

                                     Morbidity               Nonunion (late): 15%
                                                             Thrombophlebitis: 10%

===== PAGE 1065 =====
repair/reconstruction of ankle ligaments      1065

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity (cont’d)      Hematoma: 5%
                                             Wound dehiscence: 5%
                                             Infection: 1%

                     Pain score              8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               All adult

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Etiology                Degenerative arthritis; trauma; avascular necrosis of talus; septic arthritis

                     Associated              Inflammatory arthritis; any disease requiring steroids
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   REPAIR/RECONSTRUCTION OF ANKLE LIGAMENTS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Lateral ankle ligaments may be repaired acutely, but generally are reconstructed at a later date, if nec-
                   essary, with the peroneus brevis used in most reconstructions. An incision is made posterior to the distal fibula, curv-
                   ing around the lateral malleolus and ending in the anterolateral foot. The peroneus brevis tendon is identified and
                   detached from its musculotendinous junction in the leg, and the peroneus brevis muscle is sutured to the peroneus
                   longus tendon. A hole is drilled from anterior to posterior in the distal lateral malleolus; then the detached end of the

                                                                                                                                                       Orthopedic Surgery
                   peroneus brevis tendon is threaded through the hole. It is then attached to either the calcaneus or the talus, anterior
                   to the lateral malleolus, with a staple or by suturing into a hole in the bone. The skin and subcutaneous tissues are
                   closed and a splint or cast is applied.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Lateral instability of the ankle

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine or lateral decubitus

                     Incision                Posterolateral aspect of ankle

                     Special                 Bone staples; tourniquet
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin, 1 g iv preop

                     Surgical time           2h

                     Closing                 Splint or cast while still anesthetized.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal

                     Postop care             PACU → room or home

                     Mortality               Minimal

===== PAGE 1066 =====
1066   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity                Infection: < 1%
                                                              Rerupture: < 1%
                                                              Wound dehiscence: < 0.1%

                                     Pain score               5

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                Young adults

                                     Male:Female              2:1

                                     Etiology                 Ankle sprain

                                     Associated               Alcohol abuse; obesity; diabetes mellitus (DM)
                                       conditions

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    AMPUTATION THROUGH ANKLE (SYME)
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Syme’s amputation (Figs. 10.6-2 and 10.6-3) is ankle disarticulation with closure, using a posterior
                                    flap, including the heel pad. It is more functional than below-knee amputation because patients can bear weight on
                                    the end of the stump; however, success is poor in patients with vascular disease or peripheral neuropathy. The pos-
                                    terior flap is dissected directly from the calcaneus, carefully preserving the tough heel pad and its blood supply. The
                                    heel pad is sutured directly to the distal tibia to prevent migration and to cover the bone end. The posterior flap is
                                    then sutured to the anterior flap with interrupted sutures and a compression dressing applied.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma; infection

                                                                         A                                            B

                                                Figure 10.6-2. Syme’s amputation. A: Skin incisions. B: Level of bone transection in adults.
                                                (Reproduced from Bohne WHO: Atlas of Amputation Surgery. Thieme Medical: 1987.)

===== PAGE 1067 =====
amputation through ankle (syme)   1067

                                                                                                                                          Orthopedic Surgery

                                Figure 10.6-3. Common amputation levels for the lower extremity. (Reproduced
                                with permission from Greenfield LJ, et al: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practices,
                                3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Anterior and posterior flaps

                     Special                Tourniquet
                       instrumentation

===== PAGE 1068 =====
1068   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                     Surgical time           1.5–2 h

                                     Closing                 Bulky dressing; if infection present, wound may be left open.
                                       considerations

                                     EBL                     100 mL

                                     Postop care             PACU → room

                                     Mortality               Minimal

                                     Morbidity               Phantom pain: 90%
                                                             Infection: 10–15%
                                                             Wound breakdown: 10–15%
                                                             Pneumonia: 12%
                                                             MI: 7%
                                                             PE: 6%
                                                             Hematoma: 5%
                                                             Stroke: 5%

                                     Pain score              5

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                Typically, > 60 yr

                                     Male:Female              3:1

                                     Incidence                20,000–30,000/yr

                                     Etiology                 Trauma (50%); infection (30%); congenital anomaly (5%)

                                     Associated               Peripheral vascular disease (30–40%); diabetes mellitus (DM) (< 20%)
                                       conditions
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    AMPUTATION, TRANSMETATARSAL
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: This amputation, usually for infection or ischemic necrosis of the toes, is performed at the midmeta-
                                    tarsal level, leaving the patient able to walk without a prosthesis. A transverse dorsal incision is made at the trans-
                                    metatarsal level, and a plantar incision is made beginning at the corners of the dorsal incision and extending distally
                                    to the metatarsal heads to create a long plantar flap. The plantar flap is reflected proximally to the midmetatarsal level
                                    and tapered distally. The metatarsals are sectioned with a saw, and nerves and tendons are sectioned proximal to the
                                    osteotomies. The plantar flap is then brought over the ends of the bones and sutured with interrupted sutures to the
                                    dorsal flap. A compression dressing is applied.
                                    Variant procedure or approaches: Other partial-foot amputations, such as midtarsal and ray amputation, are
                                    much less common. They are managed in a fashion similar to that of the transmetatarsal amputation.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Gangrene of the toes; infection

===== PAGE 1069 =====
Lengthening or Transfer of Tendons, Ankle, and Foot      1069

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position              Supine

                     Incision              Dorsal and plantar flaps

                     Special               Tourniquet
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                     Surgical time         1–2 h

                     Closing               Bulky dressing
                       considerations

                     EBL                   50 mL

                     Postop care           PACU → room

                     Mortality             Minimal

                     Morbidity             Phantom pain: 90%
                                           Infection: 10–15%
                                           Wound breakdown: 10–15%
                                           Hematoma: 5%

                     Pain score            5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             > 60 yr

                     Male:Female           3:1

                     Incidence             20,000–30,000 total amputations/yr

                     Etiology              Vascular disease (70%); infection (25%) trauma (< 5%); congenital anomalies (< 1%)

                                                                                                                                                 Orthopedic Surgery
                     Associated            Vascular disease (70%); diabetes mellitus (30%); pulmonary disease (30%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   LENGTHENING OR TRANSFER OF TENDONS, ANKLE,
                   AND FOOT
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: In cases of motor imbalance from neuromuscular disease or trauma, tendons are lengthened or trans-
                   ferred to a new insertion to partially restore balance or normalize joint motion. For tendon lengthening, a longi-
                   tudinal incision generally is made directly over the tendon. Subcutaneous tissues and tendon sheath are incised to
                   expose the tendon, which is transected with a Z-type incision. The tendon is placed in its lengthened position, and

===== PAGE 1070 =====
1070   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                    the ends of the Z are closed with absorbable suture. If present, the tendon sheath is closed separately from the skin
                                    closure. In a tendon transfer, the tendon usually is cut close to its insertion and transferred to a new bony insertion,
                                    which often requires a separate incision. The tendon is attached to the bone either with a metal staple or by suturing
                                    it into a drill hole in the bone.
                                    Variant procedure or approaches: Achilles tendon lengthening is used to bring the ankle out of equinus. A
                                    posterior tibial tendon lengthening and/or posterior ankle capsulotomy may accompany the procedure.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Contracture of muscle

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                     Tendon Lengthening                                    Achilles Tendon Lengthening

                                     Position                        Supine                                                Prone

                                     Incision                        Over tendon; sometimes multiple incisions             Over tendon

                                     Special instrumentation         Tourniquet                                            ⇐

                                     Antibiotics                     If young, none; in elderly or infirm, cefazolin 1 g   ⇐
                                                                     iv preop

                                     Surgical time                   2h                                                    1h

                                     Closing considerations          Splint or cast while anesthetized                     ⇐

                                     EBL                             10 mL                                                 ⇐

                                     Postop care                     PACU → room                                           PACU → room or home

                                     Mortality                       Minimal                                               ⇐

                                     Morbidity                       Infection: < 1 %                                      ⇐

                                     Pain score                      4                                                     3

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Age range                Any age

                                     Male:Female              1:1

                                     Incidence                Rare

                                     Etiology                 Neuromuscular disease (80%); trauma (20%)

                                     Associated               Static encephalopathy/cerebral palsy (75%); other neuromuscular disease (25%)
                                       conditions

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                                    AMPUTATION ABOVE THE KNEE
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: In above-the-knee amputations, the distal part of the lower extremity is excised, starting just above the
                                    knee at the level of the distal third of the femur (Fig. 10.6-3). A stump is fashioned and will require prosthetic fitting
                                    at a later time. The most commonly performed stumps incorporate anterior and posterior flaps of equal length. The

===== PAGE 1071 =====
amputation above the knee          1071

                   underlying muscles (hamstrings and quadriceps) are either sewn to each other (myoplasty) or to bone (myodesis). In a
                   guillotine, or open amputation, the stump is not fashioned (tissues are not closed) until later. This is a multistage proce-
                   dure used for dirty, traumatic amputations, infection, or above-knee amputations with questionable survival and usually
                   is done as a lifesaving measure. Internal fixation of part of the remaining femur may be indicated in traumatic amputa-
                   tions. The patient returns to the OR every 1–3 d for redebridement until closure of the clean stump can be performed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: PVD or gangrene of lower extremity; trauma to lower extremity; open-femur fracture with
                   traumatic amputation; tumor of lower extremity

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Anterior and posterior on thigh

                     Special                 Amputation saw and rasp; drill for myodesis
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Patient often very ill from sepsis, chronic disease, or trauma
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin or cefamandole 1 g iv q 6–8 h), ± gentamicin (80 mg iv q 8 h); adjust dosage for renal
                                             status, ± penicillin (1–2 million U iv q 4 h).

                     Surgical time           1–2 h

                     Closing                 Compressive dressing ± special stump sock
                       considerations

                     EBL                     250 mL or more; higher for traumatic amputations

                     Postop care             Generally PACU → room (if medically unstable → ICU)

                     Mortality               Approximately 10–20%; higher in PVD (10–39%)

                     Morbidity               Phantom limb: 85–95%
                                             Phantom pain: 2–15%
                                             Wound infection ± deep infection: < 15% in PVD
                                             Respiratory failure or pneumonia: 10–15%

                                                                                                                                                          Orthopedic Surgery
                                             MI: 7–10%
                                             Thromboembolism: 6–10%
                                             Cerebrovascular accident: 5–10%
                                             Contractures—flexion and abduction: Common
                                             Urinary retention requiring catheterization: Common
                                             Failure to heal ± wound dehiscence: Uncommon
                                             Hematoma: Rare
                                             Neuromas: Rare
                                             Reamputation: Rare
                                             UTI: Rare
                                             Contralateral amputation, especially in diabetics and those with PVD Postop depression

                     Pain score              7–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               PVD, diabetic gangrene: 70–90% > 60 yr
                                             Multiple trauma with traumatic amputation, tumor of lower extremity: 18–35 yr

                     Male:Female             Overall, 3:1
                                             Elderly, predominance of males
                                             Multiple trauma, 4–5:1
                                             Tumor 1:1

                     Incidence               Common for PVD patients; rare for trauma or tumor

===== PAGE 1072 =====
1072   c h a p t e r 10.6    Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                     Etiology                 PVD and diabetic gangrene (70–90%); multiple trauma (younger patients) (rare—usually with se-
                                                              vere grade IIIC injuries with neurovascular severance); tumor (rare); uncontrollable infection (e.g.,
                                                              gas gangrene) (rare)

                                     Associated               Diabetes (70–80% of patients presenting for this procedure); numerous other serious medical
                                       conditions             conditions; multiple trauma in younger patients

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    See Anesthetic Considerations for Above- and Below-Knee Amputation, p. 1073.

                                    AMPUTATION BELOW THE KNEE
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Below-the-knee amputation is ablation of the lower limb, usually at the level of the midleg. A long,
                                    posterior flap normally is used to cover the stump. The condition of the soft tissues may dictate the level and/or type
                                    of flaps used. The procedure begins with an anterior transverse incision made over the midtibia. A long posterior flap,
                                    which is 2–3 times the diameter of the leg in length, is then made. The bone is exposed anteriorly, and the anterolat-
                                    eral neurovascular structures and muscles are transected and ligated as appropriate (Fig. 10.6-4A). The bone is then

                                                                                              A
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                                                              B

                                                Figure 10.6-4. Below-knee amputation. A: The tibia is transected 1 cm proximal to
                                                the skin incision, and the fibula is transected an additional 1 cm proximal to the level of
                                                the tibial transection. The posterior calf muscles are incised along the plane of the skin
                                                incision. B: The posterior flap is rotated anteriorly and approximated. (Reproduced with
                                                permission from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd
                                                edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1073 =====
amputation below the knee      1073

                   transected with a bone saw, and the posterior structures are transected and ligated as appropriate. The amputated
                   leg and foot are then removed from the table, and the posterior flap is tapered and shaped for closure (Fig. 10.6-4B).
                   Deep sutures are placed to secure the posterior muscles to the anterior tibia. The skin opening and subcutaneous
                   tissues are closed with interrupted sutures. Finally, a drain is placed (sometimes), and either a compression dressing
                   or an immediate postop cast is applied.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Guillotine amputation may be used as the first of a two-stage procedure in
                   infected or contaminated cases. With a guillotine amputation, the bone and soft tissues are transected very quickly
                   in guillotine fashion at the midtibial level. Neurovascular structures are ligated as appropriate. These wounds are
                   usually left open and a compression dressing applied.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Dysvascular limb; infection; trauma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                    Position                          Supine

                    Incision                          Anterior and posterior flaps; for guillotine amputation, circumferential incision
                    Special instrumentation           Bone saw; tourniquet, if traumatic (tourniquet contraindicated if infected or avascular)

                    Antibiotics                       Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                    Surgical time                     1.5 h; for guillotine amputation, 0.5 h

                    Closing considerations            May use cast; drain. Bulky dressing needed for guillotine amputation.

                    EBL                               200 mL

                    Postop care                       PACU → room

                    Mortality                         10%

                    Morbidity                         Phantom pain: 90%
                                                      Infection: 10–15%
                                                      Wound breakdown: 10–15%
                                                      Pneumonia: 12%
                                                      MI: 7%
                                                      PE: 6%

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                                                      Hematoma: 5%
                                                      Stroke: 5%

                    Pain score                        5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Usually, > 60

                     Male:Female             3:1

                     Incidence               20,000–30,000 total amputations/yr

                     Etiology                Dysvascular limb (70%); trauma (20%); infection (5%); tumor (5%); congenital anomaly (< 1%)

                     Associated              Vascular disease (70–80%); malnutrition (50%); diabetes mellitus (30%); pulmonary disease
                       conditions            (30%)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ABOVE- AND
                        BELOW-KNEE AMPUTATION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Vascular disease and tumors are the two most common indications for these surgeries. Patients presenting for ampu-
                   tations often have severe systemic vascular disease. Their inability to perform exercise limits the usefulness of preop
                   Hx in evaluating cardiopulmonary reserve and often necessitates invasive studies for full evaluation.

===== PAGE 1074 =====
1074   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                    Respiratory              Smoking is a risk factor common to both vascular and pulmonary diseases. Chronic bron-
                                                             chitis or COPD patients should have maximum medical therapy (e.g., inhaled bronchodila-
                                                             tors, theophylline, and steroids, when appropriate) prior to anesthesia. Regional anesthesia
                                                             is an excellent choice for patients with severe pulmonary disease.
                                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular           Significant cardiovascular disease is present in ∼30% of these patients. Particularly in dia-
                                                             betics, CAD is often silent. Dipyridamole thallium imaging of the heart can reveal the
                                                             preop myocardium at risk of ischemia; however, therapy of stenotic coronary arteries
                                                             usually can be undertaken only after the amputation. Medical management, to include
                                                             β-blockers when tolerated, will reduce perioperative MIs.
                                                             Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological             Peripheral and autonomic neuropathies may be present in the diabetic patient. Hence,
                                                             these patients may be more susceptible to injury from malpositioning and are less able to
                                                             tolerate the hemodynamic changes associated with regional anesthesia. Preexisting neu-
                                                             rological deficits should be carefully documented. Autonomic neuropathy is diagnosed by
                                                             any of the following: postural ↓ BP (in patient not bedridden); loss of sinus arrhythmia;
                                                             resting ↑ HR; miosis–abnormal response to darkness.

                                    Musculoskeletal          Rhabdomyolysis can occur in the presence of partial ischemia. (See Renal, below.)

                                    Hematologic              Often a trial of heparin, warfarin, or thrombolytic therapy will have been undertaken be-
                                                             fore amputation. Coag studies, including PT, PTT, and bleeding time are, therefore, often
                                                             necessary to determine the appropriateness of epidural or intrathecal anesthesia. Warfa-
                                                             rin-induced elevation of the PT can be reversed preop with FFP 5–10 mL/kg body weight.
                                                             This therapy may induce fluid overload in patients with poor cardiac reserve. For these
                                                             patients, diuretics should be administered to maintain normovolemia.
                                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Renal                    Limb ischemia can result in myoglobinemia from rhabdomyolysis. Evidence of progressive
                                                             renal failure or rising CPK-MM fractions should be treated with hydration, forced alkaline
                                                             diuresis and prompt amputation.
                                                             Tests: Consider Cr; BUN; CPK enzymes; urine myoglobin.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Laboratory               Diabetic patients require preop control of blood glucose and periop glucose monitoring.

                                    Premedication            Standard premedication (see p. B-1)

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: Either regional or GA may be appropriate.
                                    Regional anesthesia: Both SAB and epidural blocks are useful techniques. Subarachnoid anesthesia has the ad-
                                    vantage of limited spread of the block above the level of surgery, while obtaining adequate blockade of the sacral
                                    roots that are resistant to low-dose epidural techniques. Epidural anesthesia allows for extending the duration of
                                    anesthesia and for the administration of postop epidural analgesia. Anesthesia from T12 (T8 with tourniquet) is ad-
                                    equate. Full motor blockade is not necessary. Typical drugs and doses include: subarachnoid—75 mg of 5% lidocaine
                                    in 5% dextrose (controversial) with morphine 0.2 mg; epidural—12–15 mL 2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200,000
                                    in divided doses.

                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate for patients with normal airways. Intubation
                                                             is indicated for diabetic patients with gastroparesis. Beware of difficult airway in long-
                                                             standing insulin-dependent diabetics.

                                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3)

===== PAGE 1075 =====
Fasciotomy of the Thigh         1075

                    Emergence                  No special considerations

                    Blood and fluid            Moderate blood loss                        Expect 100–200 mL blood loss, mostly during
                       requirements            IV: 16 ga × 1                              cleaning of the wound made while developing a flap.
                                               NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h

                    Control of blood           Tourniquet may be used.                    Inflation pressure is typically 100 mm Hg + sys-
                      loss                                                                tolic pressure. Maximum “safe” tourniquet time
                                                                                          is 1.5–2 h, followed by a 5- to (preferably) 15-
                                                                                          min reperfusion interval, if further tourniquet is
                                                                                          necessary.

                    Special                    Tourniquet deflation and limb              Mild ↓ BP is common. In patients with moderate-
                      considerations           reperfusion                                to-severe lung disease, continue controlled ventila-
                                                                                          tion until after the lactic acid accumulated in the
                                                                                          ischemic leg is metabolized (3–5 min) because
                                                                                          these patients may be unable to increase ventilation
                                                                                          adequately to buffer this acid load.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)             Invasive monitoring is indicated in the presence of
                                               ± CVP line                                 severe cardiac or pulmonary disease. Serial blood
                                               ± Arterial line                            glucose determination should be made in the dia-
                                                                                          betic patient.

                    Positioning                ✓ and pad pressure points                  Meticulous padding of the extremities is necessary
                                               ✓ eyes                                     to prevent ischemic skin ulceration in patients with
                                                                                          vascular insufficiency.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Hematoma                                   ✓ drains
                                               Bleeding

                                                                                                                                                               Orthopedic Surgery
                    Pain                       Spinal opiates                             Epidural hydromorphone 50 mcg/mL infused at
                      management               Epidural analgesia                         50–200 mcg/h provides excellent analgesia.

                    Tests                      CXR if CVP was placed.                     Other studies as indicated

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. De Tran QH, Clemente A, Finlayson RJ: A review of approaches and techniques for lower extremity nerve blocks. Can J
                        Anaesth 2007; 54(11):922–34.
                     2. Hebl JR, Dilger JA, Byer DE, et al: A pre-emptive multimodal pathway featuring peripheral nerve block improves perioperative
                        outcomes after major orthopedic surgery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2008; 33(6):510–17.
                     3. Sites BD, Brull R: Ultrasound guidance in peripheral regional anesthesia: philosophy, evidence-based medicine, and
                        techniques. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006; 19(6):630–9.

                   FASCIOTOMY OF THE THIGH
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Increased intracompartmental pressure in the thigh requires surgical release of tight skin and fascial
                   structures (Fig. 10.6-5). This usually occurs after severe trauma to the thigh (e.g., crush injury, comminuted frac-
                   ture), after prolonged vascular surgery (with ischemia to the thigh), or with infection. Compartment syndrome is
                   a true emergency and must be treated within minutes of recognition. Failure to do so may result in loss of limb or

===== PAGE 1076 =====
1076   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                                Figure 10.6-5. Cross-section of the thigh showing the 3 major compartments.

                                    death. Conventional devices may be used to measure intracompartmental pressure, which usually is abnormal if
                                    > 30–35 mm Hg (normal = < 30 mm Hg). Fasciotomy of the thigh involves incising the skin and fascia over the
                                    thigh and debriding any necrotic tissue. The wound is left open for later redebridement, delayed primary closure,
                                    or skin grafting. Thus, the fasciotomy begins a multistage procedure of incision and debridement with subsequent
                                    reconstruction.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Compartment syndrome of thigh; crush injury to thigh; necrotizing fasciitis
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position               Supine or lateral decubitus

                                     Incision               Lateral thigh

                                     Unique                 Patient may be very ill. If an ipsilateral femoral fracture is present with a compartment syndrome,
                                       considerations       the surgeon may want to perform ORIF, intramedullary nailing, or external fixation of the fracture.

                                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin or cefamandole 1 g iv q 6 h

                                     Surgical time          1.5–2 h for fasciotomy alone

                                     Closing                Wound left open and covered by sterile dressings.
                                       considerations

                                     EBL                    250–500 mL

                                     Postop care            If surgery is performed acutely, patient frequently will be a multiple-trauma victim with numerous
                                                            injuries and extensive blood loss; usually goes to ICU.

===== PAGE 1077 =====
fasciotomy of the leg     1077

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Mortality               Dependent on extent of multiple trauma

                     Morbidity               Hypotension and fluid loss: Common
                                             Neurological deficit to peripheral nerves: Common, if decompression delayed
                                             Respiratory distress and fat embolism: Not uncommon, if concomitant femur fracture
                                             Vascular complications: Not uncommon
                                             Amputation: Rare, if decompression prompt
                                             Systemic sepsis: Rare
                                             Wound infection: Rare
                                             New compartment syndrome; insufficient fasciotomy: Rare

                     Pain score              7–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age, but predominance of males < 30 yr

                     Male:Female             5:1

                     Incidence               Extremely rare

                     Etiology                Trauma—motorcycle and motor vehicle accidents, falls, industrial injury, crush injuries; post-
                                             surgery—local hematoma and swelling; thrombosis or disruption of blood supply to thigh (e.g.,
                                             failed proximal vascular bypass surgery, aortic dissection); massive infection of thigh compart-
                                             ment (e.g., gas gangrene)

                     Associated              Burns; drug and alcohol overdose; frequently associated with trauma to other organ systems
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Fasciotomy of the Leg, p. 1079.
                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                     1. Rush RM Jr, Arrington ED, Hsu JR: Management of complex extremity injuries: tourniquets, compartment syndrome
                        detection, fasciotomy, and amputation care. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(4):987–1007, ix.
                     2. Ojike NI, Roberts CS, Giannoudis PV: Compartment syndrome of the thigh: a systematic review. Injury 2010; 41(2):133–6.

                   FASCIOTOMY OF THE LEG
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: This procedure is the surgical decompression of fascial compartments for treatment or prevention
                   of compartment syndrome. Patients are often very ill and unstable with other injuries or disease. Compartment
                   syndrome is a true emergency and must be treated within minutes of recognition. Failure to do so may result in
                   loss of limb or death. There are four compartments in the leg: anterior, lateral, deep posterior, and superficial
                   posterior (Fig. 10.6-6). Generally, all four compartments are released during the procedure. A four-compartment
                   fascial decompression can be performed through two incisions—medial and lateral. A medial longitudinal inci-
                   sion is made just posterior to the tibia; through this incision, the superficial and deep posterior compartments are
                   identified and the fascia incised in longitudinal fashion. A straight, lateral, longitudinal incision is made, and the

===== PAGE 1078 =====
1078   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                                Figure 10.6-6. Cross-section of the left leg, middle lower third, showing the four
                                                compartments with associated peripheral nerves.

                                    deep fascia overlying the anterior and lateral compartments is identified. The fascia of each compartment is then
                                    incised longitudinally. Skin incisions are rarely closed because of the swelling. A compression dressing is applied,
                                    and splints may be used.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Compartment syndrome; vascular trauma

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                     Position               Supine

                                     Incision               Medial and lateral parallel to tibia

                                     Unique                 Often associated with fracture; may require fixation.
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv preop

                                     Surgical time          30 min+

                                     Closing                Wounds left open; splint may be required.
                                       considerations

                                     EBL                    100 mL

                                     Postop care            PACU → room; vascular monitoring is carried out clinically via a pulse oximeter on toes.

                                     Mortality              Minimal

                                     Morbidity              Myonecrosis: 50%
                                                            Thrombophlebitis: 10–20%
                                                            Infection: 10–15%

                                     Pain score             3

===== PAGE 1079 =====
fasciotomy of the leg      1079

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All ages

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              ~5% of tibia fractures

                     Etiology               Trauma—blunt fracture, vascular (90%); drug overdose (10%); burns (< 5%); revascularization (< 5%)

                     Associated             Multiple trauma (60%); vascular disease (15%)
                       conditions

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Frink M, Hildebrand F, Krettek C, Brand J, Hankemeier S: Compartment syndrome of the lower leg and foot. Clin Orthop
                        Relat Res 2010; 468(4):940–50.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR FASCIOTOMY
                        OF THIGH AND LEG
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Compartment syndromes and necrotizing fasciitis are the indications for these procedures (necrotizing fasciitis also
                   may cause compartment syndrome). Patients with compartment syndrome often have no systemic disease, whereas
                   patients with necrotizing fasciitis have a rapidly life-threatening infection that requires prompt surgical debridement
                   and often is complicated by rhabdomyolysis and DIC.

                    Respiratory              Usually no special considerations, unless massive sepsis.

                    Cardiovascular           Sepsis is uniformly present in patients with necrotizing fasciitis. Management includes
                                             antibiotics and hemodynamic support with dopamine (5–15 mcg/kg/min) or epineph-
                                             rine (0.02–0.25 mcg/kg/min), with therapy guided by invasive hemodynamic monitoring,
                                             which may include PA catheter.

                                                                                                                                                         Orthopedic Surgery
                    Neurological             If fasciotomy is for compartment syndrome, there may be compromise of distal nerves and
                                             blood flow. Perform a thorough neurologic exam of the involved extremity to document
                                             preop deficits.

                    Hematologic              If infection is the indication for the fasciotomy, DIC is likely. Evaluate for pathologic bleed-
                                             ing. Administer factors necessary to correct coagulopathy during the procedure.
                                             Tests: CBC; PT; PTT; fibrinogen; fibrin split products; Plt count

                    Renal                    Both necrotizing fasciitis and compartment syndrome often cause myoglobinuria and
                                             rhabdomyolysis. Myoglobinuria can be inferred from urine that is dipstick-positive for oc-
                                             cult blood but microscopically free of RBCs in the absence of hemolysis (therefore, no free
                                             Hb in the urine).

                    Laboratory               Hct; serial K+ levels if there is an active diuresis; other studies as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Standard premedication (see p. B-1).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Regional techniques are appropriate for compartment syndrome decompression, unless
                   there is evidence of DIC or systemic infection. These surgeries are usually of short duration (< 1 h). Sepsis and hemo-
                   dynamic instability usually mandate GETA for fasciotomy in patients with necrotizing fasciitis.
                   Regional anesthesia: Either subarachnoid or epidural blocks are useful in the absence of systemic infection or se-
                   vere coagulopathy. Subarachnoid anesthesia has the advantage of adequate blockade of the sacral roots that are

===== PAGE 1080 =====
1080   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                    resistant to low-dose epidural techniques. Anesthesia from T10–S2 is adequate. Typical drugs and dosages include:
                                    subarachnoid—15 mg of 0.5% bupivacaine; epidural—12–15 mL 2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200,000 in divided
                                     doses.
                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                                    Emergence                 Consider postop ventilation for patients with impaired oxygenation or ongoing hemody-
                                                              namic instability; otherwise, no special considerations.

                                    Blood and fluid           IV: 16 ga × 1 (compartment syn-         To prevent renal damage, insure adequate circula-
                                       requirements           drome) 14–16 ga × 2 (necrotizing        tory volume; induce osmotic diuresis with manni-
                                                              fasciitis)                              tol 0.25 g/kg iv.
                                                              NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                     Furosemide 10–100 mg also may be necessary to
                                                                                                      maintain diuresis. Replace UO with 0.5 NS + 50 mEq
                                                                                                      bicarbonate/L, or as guided by invasive monitoring.

                                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).         Fluid losses (3rd-spacing, bleeding) may be significant.
                                                              UO
                                                              ± Arterial line (± ABG)                 Patients with necrotizing fasciitis require an arterial
                                                              ± CVP or PA catheter                    line and either a CVP or PA catheter to guide fluid
                                                                                                      and inotropic/pressor therapy.

                                    Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                              ✓ eyes

                                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                    Complications             DIC
                                                              Renal failure 2° rhabdomyolysis
                                                              Hypo/hyperkalemia
                                                              Sepsis syndrome, including ARDS
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Pain                      PCA or epidural analgesia               See p. C-3.
                                      management

                                    Tests                     Hct                                     For patients with sepsis: coag profile, including PT/
                                                              Electrolytes                            PTT, fibrin split products, and Plt count
                                                              UA (dipstick and microscopic)

                                    BIOPSY, LEG AND FOOT
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Biopsy is performed to excise tissues for pathologic evaluation, usually through a small, longitudinal
                                    wound. For incisional biopsy, a longitudinal incision is made over the mass. Overlying soft tissues are incised with
                                    minimal undermining. The area in question is incised and the biopsy removed, with care being taken to prevent
                                    spillage into the adjacent tissues. The pathologist often is asked to perform a frozen section to determine whether di-
                                    agnostic tissue is present. The wound is closed with interrupted sutures and a compression dressing applied. A splint
                                    or cast may be used if a significant amount of bone has been removed. If the lesion is small, x-ray control or image
                                    intensification may be necessary for localization. Needle biopsy may be used for distinct osseous lesions to obtain
                                    small amounts of tissue for culture or histology. Excisional biopsy may be used for benign lesions like exostoses or
                                    lipomas.

===== PAGE 1081 =====
Biopsy or Drainage of Abscess/Excision of Tumor    1081

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Tumor; infection

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                     Incisional Biopsy             Needle Biopsy                Excisional Biopsy

                     Position                        Supine                        ⇐                            ⇐

                     Incision                        Short longitudinal            Stab wound                   Stab wound

                     Special instrumentation         Bone-cutting instruments;     Trephine (e.g., Craig nee-   X-ray or I.I.
                                                     x-ray or I.I.                 dle); x-ray or I.I.

                     Unique considerations           Tourniquet                    ⇐                             ⇐ (Bone graft may be
                                                                                                                necessary.)

                     Antibiotics                     None (May be given postop.)   ⇐                            ⇐

                     Surgical time                   lh                            0.5 h                        0.5–2 h

                     Closing considerations          May be splinted.              Usually no splint            May be splinted.

                     EBL                             50 mL                         Minimal                      100–200 mL

                     Postop care                     PACU → room or home           ⇐                            PACU → room

                     Mortality                       Minimal                       ⇐                            ⇐

                     Morbidity                       Hematoma: 5%                  ⇐                            ⇐
                                                     Tumor spread: < 5%            ⇐                            ⇐
                                                     Infection: < 1%               ⇐                            ⇐

                     Pain score                      3                             2                            3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                All ages

                     Male:Female              1:1

                                                                                                                                                  Orthopedic Surgery
                     Incidence                Rare

                     Etiology                 Tumor (75%); infection (25%)

                     Associated               Metastatic disease; immune compromise
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lower-Extremity Procedures, p. 1083.

                   BIOPSY OR DRAINAGE OF ABSCESS/EXCISION OF
                   TUMOR
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: This procedure involves obtaining a piece of tissue for histologic and/or bacteriologic Dx by closed,
                   percutaneous means or by open biopsy. Subsequently, the area may be drained (abscess or infection) or an open exci-
                   sion of a tumor may follow (± internal fixation). For excision of tumors of the pelvis, acetabulum, or femur, please
                   consult the appropriate section describing fractures of the area. Each case must be individualized.

===== PAGE 1082 =====
1082   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                    Variant procedure or approaches: Excision of infection or tumor of proximal or distal femur, femoral shaft,
                                    pelvis, or acetabulum
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Femur: biopsy of mass; infection; osteomyelitis. Pelvis or acetabulum: biopsy of pelvis or
                                    acetabulum; drainage of abscess or infection of pelvis or acetabulum; osteomyelitis of pelvis or acetabulum; septic
                                    arthritis of acetabulum

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position               Supine or lateral decubitus

                                     Incision               Percutaneous, short or long; location depends on site of lesion.

                                     Special                Biopsy needles and instruments to take a core biopsy; bone cement may be used to plug biopsy
                                       instrumentation      site. Some surgeons use fracture table or radiolucent table with I.I.

                                     Unique                 May require intraop frozen section and Gram stain.
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics            After tissue has been obtained, cefazolin or cefamandole 1 g iv q 6 h × 48 h. A Gram stain
                                                            will help decide immediate antibiotic coverage, but cultures and sensitivities are ultimately
                                                            necessary.

                                     Surgical time          1 h for simple procedures; much longer (up to 12 h) for more extensive excisional procedures ±
                                                            further reconstruction.

                                     EBL                    100–1000 mL or more

                                     Postop care            If procedure is extensive with much blood loss, or the patient is unstable or ill from chronic sep-
                                                            sis or invasive tumor, it is prudent to send patient to ICU.

                                     Mortality              Dependent on extent of procedure. Biopsy or drainage of a small, localized abscess in soft tis-
                                                            sue or bone is rarely life-threatening. Wide/radical excision of a malignant tumor in the pelvis or
                                                            extremities is frequently life- and/or limb-threatening.

                                     Morbidity              The following are dependent on site and procedure:
                                                            Intraop fracture
                                                            Nonunion
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                                            Chronic osteomyelitis
                                                            Compartment syndrome
                                                            Residual instability of pelvis or hip joint
                                                            Fracture of pelvis or acetabulum, nonunion
                                                            Chronic osteomyelitis or septic arthritis
                                                            Hypotension 2° to blood loss
                                                            Respiratory distress
                                                            Neurological injury to lumbosacral plexus, sciatic nerve, or other peripheral nerves
                                                            Vascular injury to iliac or other vessels
                                                            Injury to GI, genitourinary, or gynecological organs

                                     Pain score             2–10

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range              Any age; predominance of elderly patients with tumors

                                     Male:Female            1:1

                                     Incidence              Rare

                                     Etiology               Benign and malignant tumors (common); infection (rare); previous surgery (rare); previous trauma
                                                            (rare)

                                     Associated             Metastatic disease or other foci of infection
                                       conditions

===== PAGE 1083 =====
biopsy or drainage of abscess/excision of tumor           1083

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR
                        LOWER-EXTREMITY PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: ORIF of femur, tibia, ankle, and foot; intramedullary nailing of femur and tibia; closed
                   reduction and external fixation of femur and tibia; distal tibia, ankle and foot procedures; repair nonunion/
                   malunion of femur and tibia; ankle arthroscopy, arthrotomy, arthrodesis; repair/reconstruction, ankle liga-
                   ments; Syme’s amputation; transmetatarsal amputation; tendon (ankle, foot) lengthening; biopsy of leg and
                   foot; biopsy or drainage of abscess/excision of tumor)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Trauma victims comprise the largest group of patients for these procedures. Minimizing the time between fracture
                   and surgery for open wounds significantly reduces the incidence of wound infection. Evaluations for other injury,
                   adequacy of fluid resuscitation, and preexisting conditions need to be undertaken promptly and used as a guide for
                   anesthetic management. Patients with bone cancer form another subset of patients and often have concurrent medi-
                   cal conditions and have undergone chemotherapy or radiation therapy preop.

                    Respiratory             Pulmonary fat embolus occurs in 10–15% of patients following bone fracture. Sx include
                                            hypoxemia, ↑ HR, tachypnea, respiratory alkalosis, mental status changes, and conjunc-
                                            tival petechiae. Lab analysis may reveal fat in the urine. Preop therapy for this condition
                                            should include supplemental O2 with mechanical ventilation, to correct hypoxemia, and
                                            meticulous fluid management to prevent worsening pulmonary capillary leak.
                                            Tests: Consider CXR; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Cardiovascular          Cardiac contusion or tamponade are possible if blunt chest trauma has occurred during
                                            the injury. A large volume of blood can be hidden around a long bone fracture site. ↑ HR,
                                            orthostasis, or ↓ BP indicate hypovolemia, and this should be corrected with crystalloid
                                            (10–40 mL/kg) or blood if Hct < 24%. In patients with a tibial or distal femur fracture, and
                                            who are presenting with hemodynamic instability and ongoing blood loss, consider apply-
                                            ing a tourniquet to the thigh prior to induction.
                                            Tests: Consider ECG; CPK enzyme levels and ECHO will help evaluate the presence of
                                            cardiac injury.

                                                                                                                                                   Orthopedic Surgery
                    Neurological            Perform a thorough neurological evaluation, including mental status and peripheral sen-
                                            sory exams. A CT scan of the head is indicated for any patient with prolonged loss of con-
                                            sciousness prior to anesthesia. Drug abuse is common in trauma patients and they should
                                            be asked specifically about any drug use.
                                            Tests: Patients with inappropriate behavior or a positive drug abuse Hx should undergo a
                                            urine and plasma drug screen.

                    Musculoskeletal         Consider cervical instability and obtain spine films if mechanism of injury included rapid
                                            deceleration or trauma to the head or neck. Myoglobinemia and ↑ K+ may result from
                                            crush injury.

                    Hematologic             Patients with cancer who have undergone chemotherapy and multiple transfusions often
                                            develop sensitivities to blood products and may require specialized blood products, such
                                            as leukocyte-poor PRBC or red cells negative for a particular antigen. The availability of
                                            these blood products should be confirmed before surgery.
                                            Tests: Hct and others as indicated from H&P

                    Renal                   Tests: UA

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Due to the risk of gastric aspiration, minimal or no premedication is given to trauma vic-
                                            tims. For other patients, standard premedication (see p. B-1). Narcotic premedication
                                            (morphine 1–2 mg iv q 10 min titrated to effect) is appropriate for patients experiencing
                                            pain with movement.

===== PAGE 1084 =====
1084   c h a p t e r 10.6   Lower Leg, Ankle, Foot, and Other Lower-Extremity Procedures

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: For trauma patients, regional anesthesia permits evaluation of mental status, provides intact
                                    airway reflexes, and ↓ blood loss. Combative patients and those requiring multiple concurrent surgical procedures or
                                    prolonged (> 2 h) procedures are often managed with GETA.
                                    Regional anesthesia: Either subarachnoid or epidural blocks are useful techniques. Subarachnoid anesthesia has
                                    the advantage of adequate blockade of the sacral roots that are resistant to low-dose epidural techniques. Epidural
                                    anesthesia allows for the administration of postop epidural analgesia. Anesthesia from T12 (T8 with tourniquet) to
                                    S2 is adequate. Full motor blockade is desirable. Typical drugs and doses include: subarachnoid—15 mg of 0.5% bu-
                                    pivacaine with morphine 0.2 mg (omit if outpatient); epidural—12–15 mL 2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200,000
                                    in divided doses (Na bicarbonate 0.1 mg/mL will speed onset of block).
                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate for patients with normal airways. Trauma
                                                             patients require a rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) and intubation with cricoid pres-
                                                             sure to prevent gastric aspiration.

                                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Trauma patients are often cold and require active
                                                             warming if < 35°C (convection blanket and active humidifier). Warming the patient may
                                                             unmask severe hypovolemia that should be corrected.

                                    Emergence                Trauma patients should have full return of protective airway reflexes and, given the pos-
                                                             sibility of fat embolus, evidence of adequate oxygenation on 50% O2 prior to extubation.

                                    Blood and fluid          IV: 14–16 ga × 2                          Some fractures can involve large (30 mL/kg)
                                       requirements          NS/LR @ 4–8 mL/kg/h                       blood losses that are hidden in the leg or thigh.
                                                             Warm fluids.                              Clinical signs of hypovolemia and serial Hct de-
                                                             Humidify gases.                           termination should guide fluid therapy.

                                    Control of blood         Tourniquet                                Inflation pressure is typically 100 mm Hg + sys-
                                      loss                                                             tolic pressure. Maximum “safe” tourniquet time
                                                                                                       is 1.5–2 h, followed by a 5– to (preferably) 15-
                                                                                                       min reperfusion interval, if further tourniquet
                                                                                                       time is necessary.
        Orthopedic Surgery

                                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                             ± Arterial line                           Arterial/CVP lines indicated for patients with
                                                             ± CVP line                                ↓ BP not readily correctable with crystalloid in-
                                                                                                       fusion, massive blood loss (> 1 blood volume), or
                                                                                                       the need for postop ventilation.

                                    Positioning              ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                             ✓ eyes

                                    Special                  Release of tourniquet                     A 20% ↓ MAP is common on tourniquet de-
                                      considerations                                                   flation. Additional crystalloid (5–10 mL/kg)
                                                                                                       may be necessary to replace edema fluid and
                                                                                                       blood loss to the leg.

                                    Complications            Fat embolism
                                                             Myoglobinemia

===== PAGE 1085 =====
biopsy or drainage of abscess/excision of tumor               1085

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Hypoxemia                                 May be 2° fat embolism.
                      (cont’d)                 VTE (DVT)                                 See VTE prophylaxis guidelines p. B-8.

                    Pain                       Spinal opiates:                           Epidural hydromorphone 50 mcg/mL infused at
                      management                  Epidural anesthesia                    100–250 mcg/h provides excellent analgesia. In-
                                                  Spinal anesthesia                      trathecal morphine 0.2–0.3 mg provides analgesia
                                                                                         for up to 24 h after administration. (Monitor for
                                                                                         delayed respiratory depression.)

                    Tests                      Hct                                       Other studies as indicated
                                               CXR, if CVP placed or oxygenation
                                               is impaired.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. De Tran QH, Clemente A, Finlayson RJ: A review of approaches and techniques for lower extremity nerve blocks. Can J
                        Anaesth 2007; 54(11):922–34.
                     2. Ganapthy S: Wound/intra-articular infiltration or peripheral nerve blocks for orthopedic joint surgery: efficacy and safety
                        issues. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(5):615–20.
                     3. Johnson RL, Kopp SL, Hebl JR, Erwin PJ, Mantilla CB: Falls and major orthopaedic surgery with peripheral nerve blockade: a
                        systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(4):518–28.
                     4. Nutescu EA: Assessing, preventing, and treating venous thromboembolism: evidence-based approaches. Am J Health Syst
                        Pharm 2007; 64(11 Suppl 7):S5–13.
                     5. Sites BD, Brull R: Ultrasound guidance in peripheral regional anesthesia: philosophy, evidence-based medicine, and
                        techniques. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006; 19(6):630–9.
                     6. Williams BA, Matusic B, Kentor ML: Regional anesthesia procedures for ambulatory knee surgery: effects on in-hospital
                        outcomes. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2005; 43(3):153–60.

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Tibial Plateau Fracture Surgery (Arthroscopically Assisted): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfbgeC5H9To
                   Treatment of Ankle Fractures: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fKDAhnwy0ec

                                                                                                                                                              Orthopedic Surgery
                   Ultrasound-Guided Popliteal Sciatic Nerve Block: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzhSiQBPE7s

