# 11_PLASTIC
# Source: 11 PLASTIC.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 11.0 Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
# Pages: 1090-1173
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Facelift And Necklift (p. 1090)
- Browlift And Blepharoplasty (p. 1095)
- Rhinoplasty (p. 1101)
- Augmentation Mammoplasty (p. 1108)
- Reduction Mammoplasty (p. 1110)
- Mastopexy/Breast Lift (p. 1112)
- Abdominoplasty (p. 1116)
- Repair Of Facial Fractures (p. 1128)
- Mandibular Osteotomies/Genioplasty (p. 1140)
- Microsurgery-Free-Flap Reconstruction (p. 1148)
- Microsurgery-Replantation (p. 1152)
- Breast Reconstruction (p. 1155)
- Chest Wall Reconstruction (p. 1160)
- Pressure Sore Reconstruction (p. 1162)
- Free Skin Graft For Burn Wound (With Tangential Excision, Excision To Fascia, Or Debridement) (p. 1168)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

           11.0 Plastic and
                                       reconstructive
                                       surgery

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                          11.1 Facial Cosmetic
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Thomas S. Satterwhite, MD
                                           David M. Kahn, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Vanila Singh, MD

===== PAGE 1090 =====
INTRODUCTION TO COSMETIC FACIAL SURGERY
                                     The presenting signs of the aging face are predictable, based on the effects of gravity, soft tissue atrophy, changes in
                                     the bony skeleton, facial expression, ultraviolet radiation exposure, and connective tissue changes. Patients present
                                     with concerns about appearing tired, angry, or aged. They also may have functional difficulties, such as difficulty
                                     breathing or visual field obstruction due to drooping brows or eyelids. Other common complaints are wrinkles
                                     around the eyes and mouth and a sagging or fatty chin and neck.
                                     Cosmetic facial surgery aims to rejuvenate and restore the facial form by surgical manipulation of the hard and
                                     soft tissues. The techniques used involve any or all of the following: soft tissue release, resection, plication, and
                                     resuspension.
                                     Facial aging takes place simultaneously in all areas of the face and neck; combined procedures are not uncommon.
                                     Generally in combined procedures, a browlift would precede a necklift, followed by a facelift. Blepharoplasty pro-
                                     cedures can be performed at different times in the surgical scheme because of their effect on eyelid tissue and brow
                                     posture. A rhinoplasty ideally is reserved for last, as it can cause bleeding and swelling that can obscure other facial
                                     surgical fields.

                                     FACELIFT AND NECKLIFT
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Facelift (or Meloplasty or Rhytidectomy)
                                     Description: Facelifts and midface lifts are procedures to rejuvenate the face by surgical manipulation of the soft
                                     tissues between the inferior orbital rim and the inferior border of the mandible. The lips and nose are generally unaf-
                                     fected. Many types of “facelift” procedures have been developed to address the diverse challenges of facial aging and
                                     rejuvenation. Traditional facelift procedures took place in the subcutaneous plane, with some skin resection. Today,
                                     three planes of dissection are used (Fig. 11.1-1). Subcutaneous dissection continues to be popular, traversing the
                                     adipose tissue below the skin and many of the vessels supplying the skin. The subSMAS technique develops the plane
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     between the superficial musculoaponeurotic system of the face (SMAS) and the parotid gland. Finally, subperiosteal
                                     dissections (midface lifts) have become popular, due to the decreased risk of postoperative hematomas. Combina-
          Plastic and

                                     tions of these dissection planes also have been described. More recently, greater attention has been paid to minimal
                                     access techniques. Surgeries such as the minimal access cranial suspension lift, as well as adjunctive procedures such
                                     as the barbed suture lift, are being performed more frequently.
                                     Local anesthetics with epinephrine are injected presurgically for the various procedures. A number of subcutaneous
                                     infiltration mixtures may be used, including one described by Klein that consists of NS 1000 mL with 1.0 mL epi-
                                     nephrine (1:1000) and 50 mL of 1% lidocaine ± 12.5 mL of 8.5% sodium bicarbonate solution. It has been shown that
                                     with the use of this mixture, 5–7 times the traditionally accepted maximum dose of lidocaine with epinephrine can
                                     be injected safely into the subcutaneous space. Not only does this solution provide hemostasis and hydrodissection,
                                     but decreased operative time and excellent perioperative analgesia also have been attributed to its use.
                                     Traditional incisions typically are made in the preauricular region with temporal and postauricular scalp extensions.
                                     The approaches for the subcutaneous and SMAS techniques resemble those used for bilateral facial palsy and parotid
                                     gland operations. The midface procedures may be carried out through intraoral, temporal, and/or lower-lid incisions
                                     and may be combined with other facelift procedures.
                                     A typical facelift may begin with subcutaneous dissection of the facial skin flap (Fig. 11.1-2) on one side, with me-
                                     ticulous hemostasis accomplished with bipolar electrocautery. The SMAS layer can then be mobilized and resus-
                                     pended. Some surgeons continue on the same side with skin resection and closure before beginning on the other side,
                                     whereas others temporarily pack the first side and perform an identical procedure on the opposite side. In the latter
                                     case, a second look for bleeding is made on each side after a waiting period.

                              1090

===== PAGE 1091 =====
facelift and necklift     1091

                               Figure 11.1-1. Anatomic layers of the face. Although the names vary, the arrangement

                                                                                                                                                       Reconstructive Surgery
                               persists, regardless of the area of the face. The facial nerve (CN VII) branches innervate
                               their respective muscles of the SMAS layer via the deep surfaces. (Reproduced with

                                                                                                                                                            Plastic and
                               permission from Thorne CHM, Aston SJ: Aesthetic surgery of the aging face. In:
                               Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM, eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition.
                               Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

                   Hematoma is the most common complication of facelift surgery. Because hypertension is the most frequently en-
                   countered medical condition in the age group that typically presents for facelift, perioperative hypertension must be
                   anticipated and treated preemptively to avoid development of hematoma. The risk is highest in male patients, per-
                   haps due to increased perfusion of the bearded region, hormonal gender differences, or increased sebaceous gland
                   density. Commonly used salicylates and other NSAIDS are contraindicated in the immediate preoperative period
                   (i.e., within 10 d of surgery).
                   Smoking also has been shown to be detrimental to facelift results, especially with regard to skin flap survival. Ideally,
                   patients should not smoke for 2 wk before and after surgery.
                   One of the least desirable complications is injury to the facial nerve, which can produce a disastrous result following
                   an elective cosmetic surgery. Many surgeons prefer that no paralytics be used during the procedure to allow for care-
                   ful monitoring of facial nerve function.

===== PAGE 1092 =====
1092   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                                 Figure 11.1-2. Dissection of SMAS/platysma flap. If a composite rhytidectomy is
                                                 performed, the same plane of dissection is used. If SMAS dissection extends to the
                                                 zygomaticus major muscle, it is termed “extended.” (Reproduced with permission from
                                                 Thorne CHM, Aston SJ: Aesthetic surgery of the aging face. In: Aston SJ, Beasley RW,
                                                 Thorne CHM, eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven:
                                                 1997.)

                                     Necklift
                                     Description: Necklift is the rejuvenation of the area from the inferior mandibular margin to the clavicles. This
                                     procedure often is combined with facelift procedures to sharpen the chin and smooth the anterior neck (i.e., im-
                                     prove the cervicomental angle). It usually is achieved by extending the facelift dissection inferiorly through the
                                     preauricular incision. A small submental incision may also be used to allow for submental liposuction, lipec-
                                     tomy, or platysma muscle modifications (plication, suspension, resection, or transection techniques).8 Some
                                     platysmal suspension techniques require the facelift incisions to remain open with continuity in the subcutaneous
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     plane laterally.
          Plastic and

                                     Variant procedures or approaches: Laser resurfacing (see p. 1104 and p. 1566), especially in the perioral and
                                     periorbital regions; blepharoplasty and browlift (see p. 1095) are common adjunct procedures.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Facelift: facial rhytids (wrinkles/creases); solar or senile elastosis; jowling; deep nasolabial
                                     folds; tear troughs; nasojugal folds; malar bags. Necklift: “turkey gobbler” neck; platysmal bands; cervical laxity;
                                     cervical rhytids

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                     Facelift                               Necklift                      Midface lift

                                      Position                       Supine, reverse Trendelenburg          ⇐                             ⇐

                                      Incision                       Preauricular, scalp                    Postauricular extension       Intraoral ± subciliary or
                                                                                                            of facelift incision + sub-   inferior lid
                                                                                                            mental incision.

                                      Special instrumentation        Infiltration equipment for super wet   ⇐ ± liposuction               —
                                                                     techniques; endoscopic equipment       instrumentation.
                                                                     (more frequent with brow lifts)

===== PAGE 1093 =====
facelift and necklift   1093

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                Facelift                                                        Necklift    Midface lift

                     Unique considerations      Oral intubation; ability to move ETT side-to-side. Consider     ⇐           ⇐
                                                securing ETT with floss or suture around teeth. Watch for:
                                                oculocardiac reflex (OCR), retrobulbar hematoma with
                                                periorbital approaches.
                                                If laser is used:                                               ⇐           ⇐
                                                • Special fire-retardant ETT and drapes
                                                • L aser eye protection for all in room
                                                • Cannula-administered O2 should be far away from laser
                                                    (fire safety).
                                                • Smoke evacuation system (See Facial Laser Resurfacing,
                                                    p. 1104.)                                                   ⇐           —
                                                Infiltration of large volumes of local anesthetic with
                                                epinephrine in facelift and liposuction procedures.

                     Antibiotics + other meds   Cefazolin 1 g iv (± methylprednisolone 125 mg iv). Antivirals   ⇐           ⇐
                                                periop if laser used (e.g., acyclovir 2400 mg × 2 d preop
                                                 and 14 d postop)

                     Surgical time              4–6 h                                                           1–2 h       2–4 h

                     Closing considerations     Trendelenburg for final hemostasis ± drains                     —           —
                                                Some surgeons prefer gentle ↑ in BP during hemostasis.          ⇐           ⇐
                                                Tissue thrombin agents may be used between the elevated         ⇐           —
                                                flaps.
                                                Sensory nerve blocks by surgeon                                 ⇐           ⇐
                                                ± Full head/face wrap before patient awakens                    —           —
                                                Gentle, nonagitated awakening to prevent sudden ↑ BP.

                     EBL                        100–200 mL                                                      ⇐           ⇐

                     Postop care                Monitor for hematoma: most common complaint is pain;            ⇐           ⇐
                                                therefore, r/o hematoma before increased analgesia or
                                                sedation.
                                                Lightly compressive dressing, ± drains: both removed at 24 h.   ⇐           ⇐
                                                2 wk no aspirin, moderate activity                              ⇐           ⇐

                     Mortality                  Rare                                                            ⇐           ⇐

                                                                                                                                                     Reconstructive Surgery
                     Morbidity                  Early hematoma:                                                 ⇐           Very rare

                                                                                                                                                          Plastic and
                                                • L arge expanding: 1–15% (return to OR)
                                                • S mall (> 30 mL): 10–15% (± aspiration in office)            ⇐
                                                Late hematoma (average = 9 d postop; 2° to exertion or          ⇐           —
                                                aspirin use; from superficial temporal vessels)
                                                Infection: 0–0.33%                                              ⇐           ⇐
                                                Nerve injury:
                                                • M otor (temporal/marginal mandibular branches)                           Very rare
                                                                                                                ⇐
                                                • T emporary: 0.1–2.6%
                                                                                                                ⇐
                                                • P ermanent: 0–0.66%
                                                                                                                ⇐           —
                                                • M otor (spinal accessory nerve): Rare
                                                Sensory injury:
                                                                                                                            —
                                                • G reat auricular nerve → ↓ sensation in lower ½ of ear ±
                                                   painful neuromas or paresthesias.
                                                • L esser occipital nerve painful → neuroma.                   ⇐           —
                                                Alopecia: 0.4% (most temporary, along the incision)             ⇐           —
                                                Skin slough: 14% (especially in retroauricular area) (12.5 ×                —
                                                greater in smokers)
                                                Dehiscence: 0.1–0.35%                                           ⇐           ⇐
                                                Parotid cysts: Rare                                             ⇐           —

===== PAGE 1094 =====
1094   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                        Facelift                                                           Necklift     Midface lift

                                                                        Poor cosmetic result:                                              ⇐            ⇐
                                                                        • H yperpigmentation
                                                                        • T elangiectasia (preexisting
                                                                          lesions may worsen)
                                                                        • H ypertrophic scarring
                                                                        • K eloids: Very rare
                                                                        • “ Pixie” (pulled-down earlobe) deformity
                                                                          (technique-dependent)
                                                                        • H airline shifts
                                                                        Ectropion (midface, approached via lid incisions only): Up to 3%

                                      Pain score                        3                                                                  3            3

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age range                 > 35 yr

                                      Male:Female               1:9 to 1:5 (increased from 1:17 in the 1970s)

                                      Incidence                 119,026 facelift procedures in the United States (2011); fifth most common cosmetic plastic
                                                                surgery procedure.

                                      Etiology                  Facial rhytids 2° solar elastosis, senile elastosis, facial expression

                                      Associated                Cancers of the skin (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and precursors, and mela-
                                        conditions              noma), in solar elastosis cases, especially fair-skinned patients

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     See Anesthetic Considerations following Browlift and Blepharoplasty, p. 1099.
                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. American Society of Plastic Surgeons web site: www.plasticsurgery.org
                                       2. Bloom JD, Immerman SB, Rosenberg DB: Face-lift complications. Facial Plast Surg 2012; 28(3):260–72.
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                       3. Graham DW, Heller J, Kurkjian TJ, Schaub TS, Rohrich RJ: Brow lift in facial rejuvenation: a systematic literature review of
                                          open versus endoscopic techniques. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 128(4):335e–41e.
          Plastic and

                                       4. Hochman M: Midface barbed suture lift. Facial Plast Surg Clin N Am 2007; (15):201–7.
                                       5. Kaye BL: Complications of face-lift. Adv Plast Reconstr Surg 1990; 6:125–76.
                                       6. Marcus BC: Rhytidectomy: current concepts, controversies, and the state of the art. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
                                          2012; 20(4):262–6.
                                       7. Rasko YM, Beale E, Rohrich RJ: Secondary rhytidectomy: comprehensive review and current concepts. Plast Reconstr Surg
                                          2012; 20(4):262–6.
                                       8. Tonnard P, Verpaele A, Monstrey S, et al: Minimal access cranial suspension lift: a modified S-lift. Plast Reconstr Surg 2002;
                                          109(6):2074–86.
                                       9. Warren RJ, Aston SJ, Mendelson BC: Facelift. Plastic Reconstr Surg 2001; 128:747–64.
                                      10. Woodward JA, Reddy UP, Ramey NA, Woodward DJ, Massry GG: Oculofacial anesthesia. In: Massry GG, Murphy MR,
                                          Babak A, eds. Master Techniques in Blepharoplasty and Periorbital Rejuvenation. Springer, New York: 2011, 45–53.

===== PAGE 1095 =====
browlift and blepharoplasty       1095

                   BROWLIFT AND BLEPHAROPLASTY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Browlift (or Forehead Lift)
                   Description: Browlift is the resuspension of the brows and elimination of upper facial rhytids to restore the youthful
                   appearance of the upper face. This procedure has a significant effect on the results of an upper blepharoplasty, with
                   which it is frequently paired. Patients presenting for browlift usually have specific concerns about lateral brow hood-
                   ing, forehead wrinkles, and glabellar creases that give them an angry appearance.
                   Like facelift procedures, browlifts have been performed in the subcutaneous plane, but the relatively avascular sub-
                   galeal and subperiosteal planes are more commonly used. The subgaleal and subperiosteal approaches have become
                   more popular with the incorporation of endoscopic techniques. The incision may be a complete bicoronal or three
                   to five small, interrupted access incisions along the hairline or within the hair-bearing scalp (Fig. 11.1-3). In the open
                   technique, the bicoronal flap is dissected off the upper face (Fig. 11.1-4). The brows are elevated by scalp resuspen-
                   sion ± resection. Closure of the scalp helps maintain the resuspended position. The soft tissues may also be fixated
                   directly to the cranium with screws or resorbable fixation devices and sutured to the temporal fascia to maintain
                   their new positions. Release of the periosteum along the superior orbital rims is a prerequisite to adequate resuspen-
                   sion when using a subperiosteal approach. Elimination of the upper facial rhytids (i.e., glabellar wrinkles) is achieved
                   by resection of the medial brow musculature (corrugator and procerus) from beneath the elevated flap. Muscular
                   bleeding is controlled with bipolar electrocautery.

                                                                                                                                                        Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                             Plastic and

                                                           A                                  B

                               Figure 11.1-3. Incisions for forehead/brow lifting. Consistent blepharoplasty results
                               demand appropriate frontal lifting technique. A: Standard coronal incision. B: Male
                               and female balding incision. Note the posterior displacement of the ascending incision
                               for maximum camouflage. Hair perimeter incisions are rarely necessary. The central
                               brow corrects nicely from only parietotemporal scalp excisions (after appropriate
                               supraperiosteal release). (Reproduced with permission from Flowers RS, DuVal C:
                               Blepharoplasty and periorbital aesthetic surgery. In: Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM,
                               eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1096 =====
1096   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                               Figure 11.1-4. Exposure after subgaleal, supraperiosteal dissection of the forehead. The
                                               supraorbital nerves can be seen easily, but the supratrochlear nerves are more superficial
                                               and are hidden by the corrugator muscles. Scissors are used to tease through the corrugator
                                               muscles to locate the supratrochlear nerve branches. The muscle is then aggressively
                                               resected, preserving the sensory branches. (Reproduced with permission from Thorne
                                               CHM, Aston SJ: Aesthetic surgery of the aging face. In: Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne
                                               CHM, eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

                                     Variant procedures or approaches: The browlift has become the facial plastic surgery procedure most adapt-
                                     able to the techniques of endoscopy. Multiple smaller (1–1.5 inch) incisions are used within the scalp for access,
                                     and small, elliptical excisions also may be used to achieve the desired effect. The muscle resection is accomplished
                                     endoscopically with very small biting forceps from beneath the flap.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Brow ptosis; brow droop; upper facial rhytids (wrinkles or creases)
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                               Figure 11.1-5. Redraping the forehead/brow using “key” fixation sutures. Maximal
                                               tension is placed laterally to elevate the lateral brow to a greater extent than the medial
                                               brow. (Reproduced with permission from Thorne CHM, Aston SJ: Aesthetic surgery
                                               of the aging face. In: Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM, eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic
                                               Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1097 =====
browlift and blepharoplasty   1097

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                         Browlift                                           Blepharoplasty

                     Position            Supine; table rotated 90 or 180°                   ⇐

                     Incision            Hairline, coronal; multiple scalp for endoscopic   Upper: tarsal fold; lower: subciliary,
                                         procedure                                          transconjunctival

                     Special             Fibrin glue, screws, or resorbable fixation de-    Bipolar electrocautery
                       instrumentation   vices for suspension; endoscopic equipment

                     Unique              Local anesthetic with epinephrine                  Retrobulbar hematoma; OCR; local anesthetic
                       considerations                                                       with epinephrine

                     Antibiotics         Cefazolin 1 g iv ± methylprednisolone 125          ⇐
                                         mg iv

                     Surgical time       1–2 h                                              ⇐

                     Closing             Place dressing before arousing patient. Gentle     No dressing (ointment)
                       considerations    arousal from anesthesia (↑ in BP or emesis →
                                         risk of hematoma)

                     EBL                 50 mL                                              Minimal

                     Postop care         PACU → room/home                                   ⇐
                                         Lightly compressive dressing                       Cool packs
                                         Head of bed elevated                               ⇐
                                                                                            Ophthalmic lubricant
                                                                                            Vision checks

                     Mortality           Rare                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity           Hematoma: Rare                                     ⇐
                                         Alopecia: Rare (more common with bicoronal         —
                                         approach)
                                         Infection: < 1%                                    ⇐
                                         Frontalis paralysis: Rare (usually transient)      —
                                         Poor cosmetic result                               ⇐
                                         Sensory nerve dysfunction                          ⇐
                                         Lagophthalmos                                      ⇐

                                                                                                                                                    Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                            Blindness: Extremely rare
                                                                                            Ectropion

                                                                                                                                                         Plastic and
                                                                                            Entropion

                     Pain score          3                                                  2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range           Most ≥ 35 yr

                     Male:Female         Blepharoplasties: 1:4
                                         Browlifts: 1:7.33

                     Incidence           Blepharoplasties: 196,286 (fourth most common cosmetic procedure in the United States, 2011)
                                         Browlifts: 46,931 (ninth most common cosmetic procedure in the United States, 2011)

                     Etiology            Facial rhytids secondary to solar elastosis, senile elastosis, facial expression, and increased
                                         muscle resting tone; Asian eyelids

                     Associated          Cancers of the skin (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and precursors, and mela-
                       conditions        noma) in solar elastosis cases, especially fair-skinned patients

===== PAGE 1098 =====
B
                                               A

                                                                                                                C

                                              D

                                                                 E
                                                                                                     F

                                                                                                            I

                                                                                     H

                                              G

                                                                                                                    L
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                                                                 K
                                                                       J

                                                          M

                                     Figure 11.1-6. Traditional blepharoplasty technique. A: The caudal margin of the excision is marked
                                     and (B) the upper eyelid skin is pinched. Skin and muscle are excised (C, D, E); excess or herniated fat is
                                     removed from medial and lateral compartments (F, G, H); and the wound is closed (I). On the lower lid,
                                     the traditional approach is flap elevation, consisting of skin or skin with attached muscle (J, K). The skin
                                     is draped upward and outward so the surgeon can assess and remove excess skin (L, M). (Reproduced
                                     with permission from Flowers RS, DuVal C: Blepharoplasty and periorbital aesthetic surgery. In: Aston
                              1098   SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM, eds. Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1099 =====
browlift and blepharoplasty         1099

                   Blepharoplasty (or Lidlift)
                   Description: Blepharoplasty (Fig. 11.1-6), or lidlift, is the surgical rejuvenation of the periorbital region to eliminate
                   the tired and aged appearance of the eyes. Westernizing the Asian eyelid also has become quite commonplace. Pre-
                   senting complaints include excess lid skin, prominent periorbital fat, and absence of upper lid folds. Blepharoplasty
                   can involve resection of skin, muscle (orbicularis oculi), and fat. Many patients presenting for this procedure will
                   require a simultaneous browlift to reestablish the baseline position of the brows, revealing the true amount of upper-
                   lid redundancy. Eyelid ptosis repair also can be achieved in the same surgery.
                   Although a seemingly benign procedure, the manipulation of periorbital fat can have very serious consequences.
                   Retrobulbar hematoma and blindness can occur postoperatively, and the oculocardiac reflex (OCR) can compli-
                   cate the intraoperative course with bradycardia and hypotension. This generally resolves with elimination of the
                   stimulus.
                   Blepharoplasty, as an isolated procedure, is often performed with local anesthetic and intravenous sedation so that
                   patients can open and close their eyes during the surgery. This helps to achieve a good result and decreases the risk
                   of lagophthalmos, which is especially important if a ptosis repair is also planned.
                   Variant procedures or approaches: CO2 laser blepharoplasty techniques have proven effective but must be
                   done under the safety parameters of eye protection and fire and burn prevention (see p. 1104). With this technique,
                   the fat and skin resections are achieved with a laser, replacing the use of a scalpel. Using the laser to gain some of the
                   skin tightening associated with blepharoplasty has also been described.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Blepharochalasis; periorbital fat; blepharoptosis; dermatochalasis; supratarsal fold ab-
                   sence; Asian eyelid

                   Suggested Readings
                     1.   American Society of Plastic Surgeons web site: www.plasticsurgery.org
                     2.   Angelos PC, Stallworth CL, Wang TD: Forehead lifting: state of the art. Facial Plast Surg 2011; 27(1):50–7.
                     3.   Codner MA, Kikkawa DD, Korn BS, Pacella SJ: Blepharoplasty and brow lift. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010; 126:1–17.
                     4.   De Cordier BC, de la Torre JJ, Al-Hakeem MS, et al: Endoscopic forehead lift: review of technique, cases, and complications.
                          Plast Reconstr Surg 2002; 110(6):1558–68.
                     5.   Lyon DB: Upper blepharoplasty and brow lift: state of the art. Mo Med 2010; 107(6):1558–68.
                     6.   Mack WP: Blepharoplasty complications. Facial Plast Surg 2012; 28(3):273–87.
                     7.   Matarasso A: The oculocardiac reflex in blepharoplasty surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 1989; 83(2):243–50.
                     8.   Ridgway JM, Larrabee WF: Anatomy for blepharoplasty and brow-lift. Facial Plast Surg 2010; 26(3):177–85.

                                                                                                                                                                 Reconstructive Surgery
                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                      Plastic and
                   (Procedures covered: facelift, necklift; browlift, blepharoplasty)

                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Cosmetic facial surgery is elective and should be performed preferably on ASA I or II patients. Often, several cosmetic
                   procedures (including facial laser resurfacing) are performed during the same surgical session. A preop discussion
                   with the surgical team is important to help define the anesthetic plan. The above procedures are usually done under
                   GA in the hospital but can also be done under MAC with local anesthesia.

                    Airway                      A careful inspection of the airway should be performed. Surgeon may request intraop
                                                manipulation of the oral ETT from side-to-side or may prefer a nasal ETT.

                    Cardiovascular              A thorough cardiovascular evaluation should be performed. HTN is the most common
                                                medical condition in this patient population. Many procedures involve the use of signifi-
                                                cant amounts of local anesthetic with epinephrine, placing the patient at higher risk for
                                                iatrogenic HTN, dysrhythmias, and coronary artery spasm. In addition, consider patient
                                                suitability for the use of mild controlled ↓ BP (particularly the facelift patient).
                                                Tests: ECG, if indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 1100 =====
1100   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                     Hematologic              3 for recent aspirin/NSAID use, and h/o easy bleeding, bruising, frequent epistaxis, etc. If
                                                              possible, stop aspirin 1 wk before surgery.
                                                              Tests: CBC, if indicated from H&P

                                     Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                     Premedication            Preop sedation with midazolam usually is appropriate. Preop steroids (dexamethasone
                                                              4–8 mg) also may be used to reduce PONV and swelling.

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                     Anesthetic technique: Cases are usually done under GA, using an ETT or LMA, as appropriate. Several authors
                                     describe the use of a propofol/ketamine MAC or “dissociative anesthetic” in the office-based setting. There are
                                     varying descriptions of this technique, generally involving a propofol infusion with incremental ketamine boluses
                                     or infusion, resulting in elimination or significant reduction in the administration of iv opiates.
                                     MAC with local anesthetic also is an option and may be advantageous for certain patients (e.g., with Hx of PONV) or
                                     for cases that benefit from a patient’s intraop ability to follow commands (e.g., ptosis repair).

                                     Induction                For those procedures done under GETA, a standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate.
                                                              An oral RAE ETT may be used to minimize intrusion into the surgical field. For cases
                                                              involving a laser, a shielded ETT manufactured for laser surgery should be used. (Note: No
                                                              shielded ETT is 100% laser-proof; always use standard precautions.)

                                     Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) with volatile anesthetic ± propofol infusion is appropri-
                                                              ate in most cases. Muscle relaxation should be avoided in cases with facial nerve monitor-
                                                              ing. Mild, controlled ↓ BP may be requested and used to facilitate hemostasis. HTN should
                                                              be avoided and treated immediately if it occurs. Maintain anesthesia during application of
                                                              head/face wrap.

                                     Emergence                Antiemetic prophylaxis (e.g., ondansetron 4 mg iv + dexamethasone 4 mg iv if non-
                                                              diabetic) is recommended, as postop emesis greatly increases the likelihood of hematoma
                                                              formation. Perform thorough oropharyngeal suctioning. A smooth emergence with no
                                                              notable increase in BP is the goal.

                                     Blood and fluid          Blood loss generally minimal
                                        requirements          IV: 18 ga × 1
                                                              NS/LR @ 2–4 mL/kg/h
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1)
          Plastic and

                                     Control of blood         Local infiltration with epinephrine
                                       loss                   Surgical hemostasis
                                                              Mild degree of ↓ BP

                                     Positioning              3 and pad pressure points              Scleral shields ± ophthalmic ointment
                                                              Rotate OR table 90–180°.

                                     Complications            OCR                                    Remove inciting stimulus. Consider atropine 0.5 mg
                                                              Retrobulbar hematoma                   and deepening anesthetic.
                                                              Local anesthetic toxicity              Rx: 20% lipid emulsion: 1.5 mL/kg iv bolus (may
                                                                                                     repeat × 2) + start infusion @ 0.5 mL/kg/min
                                                                                                     (max dose in 30 min = 12 mL/kg).

===== PAGE 1101 =====
rhinoplasty      1101

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               PONV                                        Vigorous treatment of nausea is important.
                                                                                            Consider ondansetron 4 mg iv ± prochlorperazine
                                                                                            5–10 mg iv slowly or 25 mg pr.

                    Pain                        Local infiltration + iv/po narcotics,       R/O expanding hematoma as cause of increasing
                      management                if needed                                   pain.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bogan V: Anesthesia and safety considerations for office-based cosmetic surgery practice. AANA J 2012 Aug; 80(4):299–305.
                     2. Facial Plastic Surgery Clinics of North America: Management of anesthesia and facility in facelift surgery. Stephen Prendeville,
                        MD, Seth Weiser, URNVL. 531–38.
                     3. Friedberg BL: Propofol ketamine anesthesia for cosmetic surgery in the office suite. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2003; 41(2):39–50.
                     4. Mustoe TA, Buck DW II, Lalonde DH: The safe management of anesthesia, sedation, and pain in plastic surgery. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2010 Oct; 126(4):165e–76e.
                     5. Ozcan MS, Weinberg G: Update on the use of lipid emulsions in local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a focus on differential
                        efficacy and lipid emulsion as part of advanced cardiac life support. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2011 Fall; 49(4):91–103.
                     6. Yoho RA, Romaine JJ, O’Neil D: Review of the liposuction, abdominoplasty, and face-lift mortality and morbidity risk
                        literature. Dermatol Surg 2005; 31:733–43; Erratum in: Dermatol Surg 2005; 31(9 Pt 1):1158.

                   RHINOPLASTY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Rhinoplasty, one of the greatest challenges of plastic surgery, is the surgical manipulation of the nasal
                   form for aesthetic and/or functional improvement. In combination with nasal septal surgery, it is called septorhino-
                   plasty. Common patient requests are for dorsal hump reduction and improved tip definition. Cosmetic surgery of
                   the nose can be divided into four major types: tip rhinoplasty, dorsal rhinoplasty, alarplasty, and s eptoplasty, in
                   addition to other ancillary procedures to enhance airway function.
                   Tip and dorsal procedures may be accomplished by either reduction or augmentation. Augmentation can be
                   achieved with synthetic materials such as silicone, expanded fibrillated polytetrafluoroethylene polymer (Gore-Tex),
                   porous polyethylene implants (Medpor), and hydroxyapatite. Cadaveric or autologous tissue (cartilage, bone, fascia, or

                                                                                                                                                                   Reconstructive Surgery
                   dermis) also is utilized. Common donor sites for cartilage are the ear concha (via an anterior or posterior approach), the
                   nasal septum (internal nasal approach), and the ribs. Bone harvest sites may include the outer table of cranium, the iliac

                                                                                                                                                                        Plastic and
                   crest, and the ribs. Dermal graft is commonly harvested from the groin, and fascial graft harvest is often taken from the
                   temporoparietal region. (Table 11.1-1 shows the range of open and closed rhinoplasty techniques.)
                   A throat pack is useful to prevent aspiration or ingestion of blood, as significant blood pooling can occur in the naso/
                   oropharynx area, especially with nasal osteotomies used to narrow or straighten the nasal dorsum. Cases where such
                   pooling is expected are safer under GA with a throat pack. Often rhinoplasties are done with local or regional (naso-
                   ciliary and infraorbital blocks) anesthesia with sedation. Vasoconstrictor-soaked nasal packs (cocaine vs. e pinephrine
                   vs. oxymetazoline) are placed before the first incision.
                   The decision of open versus closed technique is based on patient requirements and surgeon preference. An open
                   approach will utilize a transcolumellar incision to allow elevation of a nasal skin flap and degloving of the lower alar
                   cartilages for direct and wide exposure of the nasal framework. Closed approaches use intercartilaginous, intracar-
                   tilaginous, infracartilaginous, rim, hemitransfixion, and transfixion incisions (all hidden within the nose).
                   A typical closed rhinoplasty (Fig. 11.1-7) begins with dorsal work through intercartilaginous incisions. The dorsum
                   may be reduced using a scalpel and/or rasps beneath the undermined dorsal skin and periosteum. The septum is
                   addressed as necessary through a hemitransfixion incision (± cartilage harvest). Tip reduction by scalpel or scissor
                   resection of the lower alar cartilage ± tip suture is next. Nasal osteotomies with an osteotome and mallet begin at the
                   base of the nasal bones along the piriform aperture. Access points for the osteotomies can be intranasally, externally,
                   or through an intraoral vestibular incision. Digital manipulation completes the fractures, and this is when most of the
                   blood loss occurs. Dorsal and tip grafts are applied as necessary, with alar modifications made last. Alar reduction
                   entails wedge resection of the lateral alar base and primary closure.

===== PAGE 1102 =====
1102   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                      Table 11.1-1. Rhinoplasty Techniques
                                                          Open                                          Closed/Open                            Closed
                                            Incisions/skin flap elevation                      Intercartilaginous/transfixion             Transcartilaginous/
                                                           ↓                                               incisions                       transfixion incision
                                        Tip analysis/cephalic crura excision                                   ↓                                     ↓
                                                           ↓                               Skin elevation/extramucosal tunnels   Skin elevation/extramucosal tunnels
                                                Extramucosal tunnels                                           ↓                                     ↓
                                                           ↓                                           Rasp bony hump/                     Rasp bony hump/
                                                  Dorsal modification                            excise cartilaginous hump               excise cartilage hump
                                                           ↓                                                   ↓                                     ↓
                                        Caudal septum/anterior nasal spine                              Radix reduction                      Radix reduction
                                                           ↓                                                   ↓                                     ↓
                                                 Septoplasty/harvest                          Check profile line/septal angle       Check profile line/septal angle
                                                           ↓                                                   ↓                                     ↓
                                                     Osteotomies                           Caudal septum/anterior nasal spine    Caudal septum/anterior nasal spine
                                                           ↓                                                   ↓                                     ↓
                                                   Graft preparation                                  Infracartilaginous/                 Septoplasty/harvest
                                                           ↓                                      transcolumellar incisions                          ↓
                                         Definitive dorsum/spreader grafts                                     ↓                      Infracartilaginous incisions
                                                           ↓                                     Tip exposure and analysis                           ↓
                                          Tip: Columella strut/tip sutures                                     ↓                         Alar cartilage delivery
                                                           ↓                                     Septal correction/harvest                           ↓
                                                        Closure                                                ↓                       Excision/incision/sutures
                                                           ↓                                             Osteotomies                                 ↓
                                               Alar base modification                                          ↓                              Osteotomies
                                                           ↓                                Definitive dorsum/spreader grafts                        ↓
                                           Dressing/postop management                                          ↓                                  Grafts
                                                                                                Tip/columellar modification       (spreader/dorsum/columella/tip)
                                                                                                  (excision/sutures/grafts)                          ↓
                                                                                                               ↓                                 Closure
                                                                                                            Closure                                  ↓
                                                                                                               ↓                        Alar base modifications
                                                                                                    Alar base modification                           ↓
                                                                                                               ↓                                Dressing
                                                                                                           Dressing
                                      Note: Only those steps appropriate for the individual case are performed.
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     Depending on the type of rhinoplasty performed, different dressings will be applied at the end of the procedure.
                                     When nasal bone osteotomies are used, the patient will require a dorsal nasal splint ± bilateral nasal packing. Nasal
          Plastic and

                                     packing is generally removed at 24–72 h postoperatively. When septal manipulation is needed, nasal packing or some
                                     sort of septal splint may be placed. The packs are generally removed within 3 d, but the splints can be maintained
                                     much longer and the nasal airways kept patent with vasoconstrictor nasal sprays.
                                     Variant procedures or approaches: Placement of a columellar strut (cartilage graft) and release of the tip
                                     depressor muscle often are achieved via intraoral vestibular incisions (behind the upper lip).
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Posttraumatic nasal deformity (including disordered breathing, “saddle nose,” crooked
                                     nose, septal deviation); developmental nasal deformities (bulbous tip, flat tip, drooping tip, broad dorsum, dorsal
                                     hump, alar widening, “Pinocchio nose”); congenital nasal malformation (cleft nasal deformities)

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                      Position                       Supine, table may be rotated 180°. If GA: oral ETT toward foot of bed, shoulder roll, neck ex-
                                                                     tended, scleral lubricant, shields

                                      Incision                       External vs. internal nasal incisions

                                      Special                        Headlight
                                        instrumentation

                                      Unique                         Throat pack for expected nasopharyngeal bleeding. Intranasal vasoconstrictors.
                                        considerations

                                      Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g iv

===== PAGE 1103 =====
rhinoplasty   1103

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Surgical time          1–2.5 h

                     Closing                Suction stomach via OG tube at the end of surgery. Remove throat pack prior to extubation.
                       considerations       Internal and/or external nasal splints are placed for dressings.

                     EBL                    Tip rhinoplasty: 20 mL
                                            Dorsum with osteotomies: 75–150 mL
                                            Septoplasty: + 50 mL

                     Postop care            PACU → room (most patients are home the same day). Ensure minimal PONV; elevate head of
                                            bed; no pressure on nose (e.g., O2 mask).

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Infection: > 1%
                                            Adverse cosmetic result:
                                                Alar notching
                                                Alar collapse
                                                Dorsal irregularity
                                                Asymmetry
                                                Tip droop
                                                Adverse functional result (i.e., poor airway)
                                                Septal perforation

                     Pain Score             3 (4 with osteotomies)

                                                                                                                                                  Reconstructive Surgery
                      A

                                                                                                                                                       Plastic and

                      B

                               Figure 11.1-7. Closed rhinoplasty. A: Transcartilaginous approach using an intra
                               cartilaginous incision. B: Delivery approach, using a high intercartilaginous incision
                               and a marginal incision to facilitate delivery of the lateral crura. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Daniel RK: Rhinoplasty. In: Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM, eds.
                               Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1104 =====
1104   c h a p t e r 11.1  Facial Cosmetic Surgery

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age Range                Most ≥ 15 yr

                                      Male:Female1             1:1.7
                                                 1
                                      Incidence                243,772 (second most common cosmetic procedure in the United States, 2011)

                                      Etiology                  Developmental; acquired (posttraumatic); congenital (see Secondary Cleft Lip and Nasal
                                                               Surgery, p. 1457).

                                      Associated               Breathing difficulties; psychosocial issues (body dysmorphic disorder)
                                        conditions

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal and Sinus Surgery, p. 233.
                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. American Society of Plastic Surgeons web site: www.plasticsurgery.org, 444 East Algonquin Rd, Arlington Heights, IL
                                          60005-4664.
                                       2. Angelos PC, Been MJ, Toriumi DM: Contemporary review of rhinoplasty. Arch Facial Plast Surg 2012 Jul–Aug; 14(4):238–47.
                                       3. Becker DG, McLaughlin RB, Loevner LA, et al: The lateral osteotomy in rhinoplasty: clinical and radiographic rationale
                                          for 2. osteotome selection. Plast Reconstr Surg 2000; 105(5):1806–19.
                                       4. Cannon DE, Rhee JS: Evidence-based practice: functional rhinoplasty. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2012 Oct; 45(5):1033–43.
                                       5. Cuzalina A, Qaqish C: Revision rhinoplasty. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am 2012 Feb; 24(1):119–30.
                                       6. Facial Plastic Surgery Clinics of North America: Management of anesthesia and facility in facelift surgery. Stephen
                                          Prendeville, MD, Seth Weiser, URNVL. pp. 531–38.
                                       7. Molliex S, Navez M, Baylot D, et al: Regional anaesthesia for outpatient nasal surgery. Br J Anaesthesia 1996; 76:151–3.
                                       8. Rohrich RJ, Ahmad J: Rhinoplasty. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 128:49–73
                                       9. Stevens MR, Emam HA: Applied surgical anatomy of the nose. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am 2012; 24(1):25–38.

                                     OTOPLASTY
                                     See Chapter 12.8, Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations, Otoplasty, p. 1462.
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                     FACIAL LASER RESURFACING
                                     Description: Laser resurfacing is a technique by which a controlled burn is administered to the skin of the face
                                     with laser technology, creating a healing process that reduces the signs of aging or acne. CO2 laser resurfacing
                                     is commonly used with facial cosmetic procedures. It is used widely for the periorbital and perioral creases and
                                     wrinkles not addressed by previously described facial cosmetic surgical techniques. Nerve blocks, local anesthe-
                                     sia, intravenous sedation, and GA are all possibilities for laser treatment. The choice of anesthetic depends more
                                     on the specific surgical procedures to be performed first, as the laser procedure is usually adjunctive and added
                                     at the end. Facial laser resurfacing is done frequently in an office-based setting (see Chapter 14.0, Office-Based
                                     Procedures, p. 1566). Because laser resurfacing is usually an adjunct to another facial cosmetic procedure, the fol-
                                     lowing discussion pertains primarily to the unique set of safety issues that must be addressed in the OR.
                                     Ocular Hazards: These include direct and reflected injury to the eye. Everyone present, including the patient and
                                     all medical personnel, requires laser-specific (i.e., wavelength-specific) safety eyewear. Laser-specific scleral shields
                                     must be available for the patient in cases where the patient’s eyewear would be in the operative field. Protective eye-
                                     wear must be undamaged and have
                                          •   Permanent labels with wavelength and optical density tolerance
                                          •   Side shields
                                          •   Damage threshold of > 10 sec

===== PAGE 1105 =====
facial laser resurfacing          1105

                        •    No surface reflection
                        •    Good fit
                        •    Approval from the laser safety officer
                   Fire and reflectivity hazards: Many items used in the OR (e.g., drapes, sponges, plastic cannulas) are made of
                   materials that can be fire hazards if not kept from interacting with the laser beam. Protection from fire and reflectiv-
                   ity is provided by:
                        • Having fire-retardant or moist draping
                        • Having water basin available
                        • Having a fire extinguisher readily available
                        • Avoiding all alcohol-containing prep solutions
                        • Avoiding use of plastic and rubber instruments (may melt or ignite)
                        • Using special fire-resistant ETTs or wet sponge protection for plastic ETTs to decrease the possibility of tube
                           breach or ignition
                        • Avoiding open sources of O2 (nasal cannulas, etc.)
                        • Avoiding metal or other reflective materials
                   Airborne contaminants: The laser destruction of cells releases carbon particles, microbials, DNA, and toxic fumes.
                   Protection for the patient and medical personnel is provided by:
                        • Utilizing a smoke evacuation system 2 cm from created plume
                        • Wearing high-filtration masks. Note that these masks become less effective if moistened from perspiration during
                           a long case; if the laser is to be used at the end of a case, changing masks before using the laser may be prudent.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Browlift and Blepharoplasty, p. 1099, or Office-Based Laser Skin Resurfac-
                   ing, p. 1567.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Alster TS, Apfelberg DB, eds: Cosmetic Laser Surgery: A Practitioner’s Guide. 2nd edition. Wiley-Liss, New York: 1999.
                     2. Cillo JE Jr, Finn R: Moderate intravenous sedation for office-based full face laser resurfacing using a continuous infusion
                        propofol pump. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2005; 36(7):903–7.
                     3. Facial Plastic Surgery Clinics of North America: Management of anesthesia and facility in facelift surgery. Stephen Prendeville,
                        MD, Seth Weiser, URNVL. pp. 531–38.
                     4. Potter JK, Finn R, Cillo J: Modified tumescent technique for outpatient facial laser resurfacing. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2004;
                        62(7):829–33.
                     5. Ramos-Zabala A, Pérez-Mencía MT, Fernández-García R, Cascales-Núñez MR: Anesthesia technique for outpatient facial

                                                                                                                                                                   Reconstructive Surgery
                        later resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med 2004; 34(3):269–72.
                     6. Wald D, Michelow BJ, Guyuron B: Fire Hazards and CO2 Laser Resurfacing. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 1998;

                                                                                                                                                                        Plastic and
                        101(1):185–8.

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Live Surgery Split Thickness Skin Graft: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvbxmm9inoo
                   Liposuction Surgery Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfRsBijqS4E
                   BSSO & Osseous Genioplasty: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQI8L5Sxa6w
                   LeFort III Osteotomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hk_AUbVuDWE
                   LeFort II Osteotomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5YddYjhThgw
                   LeFort I Osteotomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7z5TNrJcE3U
                   TRAM flap narrated: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcew3ycbG50

===== PAGE 1106 =====
c h a p t e r

                          11.2 Nonfacial Aesthetic
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Thomas S. Satterwhite, MD
                                           David M. Kahn, MD
                                           George W. Commons, MD (Liposuction)

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Vanila Singh, MD
                                           Bruce D. Halperin, MD (Liposuction)

===== PAGE 1108 =====
AUGMENTATION MAMMOPLASTY
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Augmentation mammoplasty is accomplished through the use of saline or silicone gel–filled breast
                                     implants. The surgery may be performed under GA or local anesthesia with sedation. The patient is positioned either
                                     with the arms abducted at 90° or with the hands tucked at the sides. Local anesthetic (± epinephrine) is infiltrated
                                     into the skin at the incision site and under the glandular tissue. Implant insertion can be done through inframam-
                                     mary, periareolar, transaxillary, or transumbilical incisions. The implant is placed in a pocket that is created beneath
                                     the mammary gland (subglandular), under the pectoralis muscle (submuscular), partially subglandular and partially
                                     submuscular (dual plane), or beneath the pectoralis fascia (subfascial), depending on the surgeon’s preference and the
                                     amount of tissue available. An endoscope may be used to assist with dissection of the pocket. When the implant is
                                     placed in the submuscular position, the pectoralis muscle is divided from its insertion along the inframammary fold
                                     and sometimes along the sternal insertion to allow the muscle to drape over the implant. Regardless of the location
                                     of the pocket, the surgical wound is carefully irrigated and inspected for hemostasis. Sizers, either predetermined
                                     volumes of silicone gel or adjustable saline- or air-filled temporary implants, may be used to help determine the ap-
                                     propriate final volume and placement. The patient may be placed in the seated position to assess the size, shape, and
                                     symmetry of the breasts. The sizers are then replaced with the permanent prostheses. If permanent saline implants
                                     are used, they are filled with saline until the desired volume is reached; gel-filled implants do not have alterable vol-
                                     umes. The wounds are closed, and dressings are applied (Fig. 11.2-1).
                                     Augmentation mammoplasty usually is performed as an outpatient procedure, although some patients may want an
                                     overnight stay for pain management and antiemetics. PONV is not uncommon, and all efforts should be made to
                                     decrease its frequency.
                                     Variant procedure or approaches: The endoscopic transumbilical approach is used much less frequently.
                                     Preop diagnosis: Hypomastia, breast ptosis
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                               Figure 11.2-1. Breast augmentation. Implants may be placed in a subglandular
                                               or subpectoral position. (Reproduced with permission from Spear SL: The Breast:
                                               Principles and Art. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

                              1108

===== PAGE 1109 =====
Augmentation Mammoplasty             1109

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                       Supine

                     Incision                       Inframammary, periareolar, transaxillarym, or transumbilical

                     Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Unique considerations          May place patient in sitting position during procedure.

                     Surgical time                  1h

                     Closing considerations         May need patient in sitting position for application of dressings.

                     EBL                            Minimal

                     Postop care                    Outpatient procedure

                     Mortality                      Rare

                     Morbidity                      Prosthesis failure: 5%
                                                    Capsular contracture: 5%
                                                    Hematoma: 3%
                                                    Infection: 2%
                                                    Wound dehiscence: < 1%
                                                    Cosmetic disappointments

                     Pain score                     3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                   Typically 17–45 yr but also may be done on the contralateral breast in a patient undergoing
                                                 breast reconstruction.

                     Incidence                   307,180 performed in the United States in 2011; the most common cosmetic surgical
                                                 procedure

                     Etiology                    Developmental; involution after breast-feeding; age-related atrophy or ptosis

                     Associated conditions       Not common but can be seen with Poland’s syndrome.

                                                                                                                                                                Reconstructive Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                     Plastic and
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Mastopexy/Breast Lift, p. 1113.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Alpert B, Lalonde D: MOC-PS CME article: breast augmentation. Plast Reconstr Surg 2008; 121:1.
                     2. Coopey SB, Specht MC, Warren L, Smith BL, Winograd JM, Fleischmann K: Use of preoperative paravertebral block
                        decreases length of stay in patients undergoing mastectomy plus immediate reconstruction. Ann Surg Oncol 2013; 20(4):1282–6.
                     3. Gardiner S, Rudkin G, Cooter R, Field J, Bond M: Paravertebral blockade for day-case breast augmentation: a randomized
                        clinical trial. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(5):1053–9.
                     4. Graf RM, Bernandes A, Rippel R, et al: Subfascial breast implant: a new procedure. Plast Reconstr Surg 2003; 111(2):
                        904–8.
                     5. McLaughlin JK, Lipworth L, Murphy DK, et al: The safety of silicone gel-filled breast implants: a review of the epidemiologic
                        evidence. Ann Plast Surg 2007; 59(5):569–80.
                     6. Nahabedian MY, Patel K: Management of common and uncommon problems after primary breast augmentation. Clin Plast
                        Surg 2009; 36:127–138.
                     7. Tebbetts JB: Dual plane breast augmentation: optimizing implant-soft tissue relationships in a wide range of breast types.
                        Plast Reconstr Surg 2001; 107(5):1255–72.
                     8. Thorne CH: An evidence-based approach to augmentation mammaplasty. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 126:2184.
                     9. See Suggested Readings Mastopexy/Breast Lift, p. 1114.

===== PAGE 1110 =====
1110   c h a p t e r 11.2   Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                     REDUCTION MAMMOPLASTY
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Breast reduction surgery can be done as an outpatient procedure or with an overnight stay. One might
                                     choose to admit the patient overnight in a hospital setting to monitor for hematoma formation and evidence of
                                     decreased blood supply to the nipple-areola complex. For these patients, the pain from this procedure is relatively
                                      low; therefore, PONV tends to be the greater issue in the immediate postoperative period.
                                     The traditional type of breast reduction performed in the United States is the inferior pedicle technique using a
                                     Wise pattern (“anchor-type” scar) for the skin excision (Fig. 11.2-2). Markings are made with the patient upright in
                                     the preoperative holding area. The areola is marked circumferentially with an areola sizer and incised. The remaining
                                     incision lines are scored with a scalpel. Next, the inferior pedicle, which contains the neurovascular supply to the
                                     nipple-areola complex, is deepithelialized. Excess skin and breast tissue are excised, preserving the pedicle of tissue
                                     that will compose the breast mound. The resected tissue from each breast, which can range from 200–1000 g, is
                                     weighed as to an adjunctive method of ensuring symmetry. Temporary skin closure with staples allows the patient to
                                     be placed in a sitting position so that the breasts can be evaluated for symmetry. When the surgeon is satisfied with
                                     the appearance of the breasts, they are closed with sutures. Drains may be placed, depending on surgeon preference
                                     (Fig. 11.2-2). After the skin has been closed, the location of the nipple and areola is marked and excised, and the
                                     nipple-areola complex is delivered and sutured into position. Soft, supportive dressings are placed.
                                     A technique that has gained in popularity recently is the vertical reduction mammoplasty, which shares the fun-
                                     damental principles of excision of excess breast tissue and preservation of blood flow to the nipple-areola complex
                                     but differs in choice of skin incision and pedicle. Relatively more time is spent performing the tissue excision and
                                     pedicle shaping, but wound closure time is greatly decreased (resulting in a “lollipop-type” scar) compared with the
                                     traditional Wise-pattern technique.
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                             A
          Plastic and

                                                                                                    B

                                               Figure 11.2-2. Reduction mammoplasty using an inferior pedicle technique. A: The skin
                                               and breast tissue on the medial and lateral sides of the pedicle are resected. B: The medial
                                               and lateral skin envelopes are sutured at the midline, leaving an inverted T-shaped scar.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Spear SL: The Breast: Principles and Art. Lippincott-
                                               Raven: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1111 =====
Reduction Mammoplasty          1111

                   Variant procedure or approaches: Liposuction may be used in combination with this procedure. Reduction
                   mammoplasty using liposuction alone has increased in popularity.
                   Preop diagnosis: Macromastia, gigantomastia, mammary hypertrophy

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, arm abducted 90°

                     Incision                Marked preop. Most have circumareolar incision with an inferior anchor-shaped extension (Fig.
                                             11.2-2) or a short vertical component (“lollipop” scar).

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Unique                  May place patient in sitting position during procedure to assess symmetry; Foley catheter; SCDs
                       considerations

                     Surgical time           2–5 h, depending on volume of reduction and technique

                     Closing                 May place patient in sitting position for application of dressings.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     100–200 mL

                     Postop care             Outpatient or 24–h stay for pain/nausea management. Avoid the use of Toradol in the first 24 h
                                             because of the large, raw surface created between the skin flaps and breast tissue.

                     Mortality               Minimal

                     Morbidity               Dehiscence: 5%
                                             Infection: 1%
                                             Seroma/hematoma: < 1% (may require reexploration)
                                             Skin flap necrosis
                                             Loss of nipple-areola complex (may require urgent reexploration)
                                             Loss of nipple-areola sensation
                                             Hypertrophic scarring
                                             Cosmetic disappointments

                     Pain score              3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                          Reconstructive Surgery
                     Age range               25–65 yr

                                                                                                                                                               Plastic and
                     Incidence               63,109 performed in the United States in 2011

                     Etiology                Developmental; childbearing; obesity

                     Associated              None common
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Mastopexy/Breast Lift, p. 1113.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Hall-Findlay E: A simplified vertical reduction mammaplasty: shortening the learning curve. Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;
                        104(3):748–59.
                     2. Lund HG Jr, Kumpf AL: Aesthetic breast surgery: emerging trends and technologies. Mo Med 2010; 107(3):203–9.
                     3. Palmieri B, Benuzzi G, Costa A, et al: Breast reduction and subsequent cancer: a prophylactic perspective. Breast 2006;
                        15(4):476–81.
                     4. See Suggested Readings Mastopexy/Breast Lift, p. 1113.

===== PAGE 1112 =====
1112   c h a p t e r 11.2   Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                     MASTOPEXY/BREAST LIFT
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Mastopexy procedures reduce the volume of the skin envelope to match the volume of the breast
                                     gland. Depending on the degree of ptosis (“droopy breasts”) and the wishes of the patient, the ptosis may be treated
                                     by augmentation alone to increase the volume of the breast, by skin excision alone to reduce the skin envelope
                                     appropriately, or by a combination of a mastopexy and an augmentation.

                                     The operation itself resembles a reduction mammoplasty, except that breast tissue is generally excised mini-
                                     mally or not at all, and an implant may be added (mastopexy/augmentation). The patient is marked before
                                     surgery in the upright position. After the induction of anesthesia, the arms are positioned either tucked at the
                                     patient’s sides or abducted 90°. The procedure begins with the areola being marked circumferentially with an
                                     areola sizer and then incised. Next, the skin flaps are elevated. The breast tissue is moved to a higher position
                                     on the chest wall, and the skin is redraped and tailor-tacked closed. The patient is placed in a sitting position to
                                     assess for symmetry and nipple location. The nipple-areola complex is then brought out into its new position,
                                     and dressings are applied.

                                     Preop diagnosis: Breast ptosis

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                      Position                       Supine

                                      Incision                       Circumareolar ± inferior vertical extension or complete anchor

                                      Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                      Unique considerations          May place patient in sitting position during procedure.

                                      Surgical time                  2–4 h

                                      Closing considerations         May place patient in sitting position for application of dressings.

                                      EBL                            > 100 mL

                                      Postop care                    Outpatient or 24-h stay

                                      Mortality                      Minimal
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                      Morbidity                      Wound healing: 5%
          Plastic and

                                                                     Infection: 1%
                                                                     Seroma/hematoma: < 1%
                                                                     Hypertrophic scarring
                                                                     Cosmetic disappointments

                                      Pain score                     3–4

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age range                35–65 yr

                                      Incidence                90,679 performed in the United States in 2011

                                      Etiology                 Age-related ptosis; involution after breastfeeding; weight loss

                                      Associated               None common
                                        conditions

===== PAGE 1113 =====
Mastopexy/Breast Lift       1113

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR
                        MAMMOPLASTY/MASTOPEXY
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Typically, three patient populations present for mammoplasty: (a) healthy individuals, for breast reduction/aug-
                   mentation/lift or removal of an implant; (b) morbidly obese, for breast reduction; and (c) breast cancer patients, for
                   reconstruction after mastectomy. (For preop considerations in the morbidly obese patient, see Anesthetic Consid-
                   erations for Abdominoplasty, p. 1118.) Breast cancer patients undergoing mastectomy with immediate reconstruc-
                   tion will not have had either chemotherapy or radiation. The following considerations are for breast cancer patients
                   undergoing delayed reconstruction post-chemotherapy.

                    Respiratory              Pulmonary fibrosis may complicate chemotherapy. Alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophospha-
                                             mide and melphalan), used to treat breast cancer, have some pulmonary toxicity. Consider
                                             pulmonary fibrosis in a patient reporting dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and fever.
                                             Tests: Consider CXR; ABG, PFTs as indicated from H&P.

                    Cardiovascular           Cardiomyopathy and CHF may result from chemotherapy, especially doxorubicin (Adria-
                                             mycin) > 550 mg/m2.
                                             Tests: Consider ECG; ECHO, if indicated from H&P.

                    Neurologic               Note any pre-existing injury to long thoracic nerves, as evidenced by winged scapula
                                             deformity.

                    Musculoskeletal          Avoid upper extremity iv and BP cuff on mastectomy side.

                    Hematologic              Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia from chemotherapy may be present.
                                             Tests: CBC; Plt count

                    Renal/Hepatic            Methotrexate can produce some renal and hepatic dysfunction.
                                             Tests: Cr; LFTs

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P, prior chemotherapy

                    Premedication            Midazolam 1–2 mg iv immediately preop. Surgeon may want to mark the patient’s skin
                                             preop, with patient standing. Delay premedication until this has been done.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                     Reconstructive Surgery
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                                                                                                                                          Plastic and
                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2). ✓ with surgeons regarding use of a nerve stimulator during
                                             dissection (and the need to avoid muscle relaxants). Consider intratracheal lidocaine 4%
                                             LTA to minimize coughing during position changes.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Surgeons may want patient sitting for part of the pro-
                                             cedure. Pneumothorax should be considered with any change in lung inflation pressure,
                                             O2 sat, or BP.

                    Emergence                During some of the procedure and for application of dressing, patient may be moved to sit-
                                             ting position, with consequent coughing, bucking, etc. (Rx: deeper anesthesia, e.g., propo-
                                             fol 0.5 mg/kg or lidocaine 1 mg/kg.) Watch BP carefully and treat orthostatic hypotension
                                             if it occurs, usually with a fluid bolus if the patient is not volume sensitive (Hx of CHF or
                                             renal failure).

                    Blood and fluid          IV 16–18 ga × l                        Minimal blood loss for simple reconstruction,
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 4–8 mL/kg/h                    augmentation, or reduction; larger blood losses
                                                                                    anticipated for combined procedures (e.g., mas-
                                                                                    tectomy with immediate reconstruction or flap
                                                                                    reconstruction).

===== PAGE 1114 =====
1114   c h a p t e r 11.2      Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                     Monitoring                   Standard monitors (p. B-1)                 Arterial line in the morbidly obese may be necessary
                                                                                                             to obtain accurate BP measurements.

                                     Positioning                  Patient may need to be sitting for         Avoid HTN, bucking, and straining; these may
                                                                  application of dressing.                   cause or exacerbate bleeding at reconstruction site.
                                                                                                             Careful padding of arms to protect them during
                                                                                                             position change.

                                            POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications                Pneumothorax

                                     Pain                         PCA (see p. C-3)                           Consider multimodal therapy including gabapentin,
                                       management                 Regional nerve blocks                      opiates, and paravertebral/intercostal nerve blocks.

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1.   American Society of Plastic Surgeons web site: www.plasticsurgery.org
                                       2.   Arain MR, Buggy DJ: Anaesthesia for cancer patients. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007; 20(3):247–53.
                                       3.   Elliott LF: Circumareolar mastopexy with augmentation. Clin Plast Surg 2002; 29(3):337–47.
                                       4.   Gardiner S, Rudkin G, Cooter R, Field J, Bond M: Paravertebral blockade for day-case breast augmentation: a randomized
                                            clinical trial. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(5):1053–9.
                                       5.   Kuruba R, Koche LS, Murr MM: Preoperative assessment and perioperative care of patients undergoing bariatric surgery.
                                            Med Clin North Am 2007; 91(3):339–51.
                                       6.   Matarasso A: Suction mammoplasty: the use of suction lipectomy alone to reduce large breasts. Clin Plast Surg 2002;
                                            29(3):433–43.
                                       7.   Schnabel A, Reichl SU, Kranke P, Pogatzki-Zahn EM, Zahn PK: Efficacy and safety of paravertebral blocks in breast surgery:
                                            a mata-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth 2010; 105(6):842–52.
                                       8.   Warren AG, Morris DJ, Houlihan MJ, Slavin SA: Breast reconstruction in a changing breast cancer treatment paradigm. Plast
                                            Reconstr Surg 2008; 121(4):1116–26.

                                     BRACHIOPLASTY
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                            SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
          Plastic and

                                     Description: Brachioplasty is performed as outpatient surgery for patients who note “flabbiness” or a “bat-wing”
                                     appearance of their upper arms. Markings are done in the preoperative holding area with the patient upright, arms
                                     abducted and flexed. An incision is made starting along the chest wall or in the axilla, extending onto the upper arm,
                                     and stopping before the elbow. Excess skin and soft tissue are excised, and the incision is closed, sometimes over a
                                     drain. Dressings are applied, often followed by a compression garment or ACE wraps.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Upper arm laxity or redundancy, lipodystrophy.

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                      Position                       Supine, arms abducted

                                      Incision                       From chest/axilla, extending along lower inner arm

                                      Unique considerations          Both arms must be mobile and prepped circumferentially; SCDs

                                      Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                      Surgical time                  1–2 h

===== PAGE 1115 =====
Brachioplasty     1115

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     EBL                       Minimal

                     Postop care               Avoid ketorolac first 24–48 h

                     Mortality                 Minimal

                     Morbidity                 Seroma: 10%
                                               Hypertrophic scarring: 10%
                                               Dehiscence: 7.5%
                                               Infection: 5–7%
                                               Nerve injury: 5%

                     Pain score                3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              20–65 yr

                     Male:Female            1:50

                     Incidence              14,998 performed in the United States in 2011

                     Etiology               Overweight; aging; massive weight loss

                     Associated             Obesity
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for brachioplasty have often undergone gastric bypass surgery with massive weight loss. IV access
                   may be difficult. Consider need for iv access in lower limb or neck due to bilateral arm surgery. (See Anesthesia Con-
                   siderations in Morbid Obesity, p. 514)

                         INTRAOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                    Reconstructive Surgery
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, routine monitors
                   Procedure may be combined with other plastic procedures, necessitating position changes.

                                                                                                                                                         Plastic and
                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) for healthy patients. Special considerations for the mor-
                                             bidly obese include prophylaxis for aspiration, followed by rapid-sequence induction in
                                             an appropriately positioned patient (see Fig. 7.2-6). If mandibular and cervical mobility
                                             are decreased by excessive soft tissue, an awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6) with the
                                             patient sitting may be necessary. Anticipate rapid O2 desaturation during periods of hy-
                                             poventilation, even with adequate preoxygenation.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Calculate most drug doses on basis of lean body mass.
                                             In the obese, controlled ventilation with larger TVs, PEEP, and high inspired O2 concentra-
                                             tion is recommended. Positioning may be difficult, and care must be taken to give adequate
                                             padding and support.

                    Emergence                Give antiemetics (ondansetron 4 mg) 20 min before conclusion of surgery.

                    Blood and fluid          Minimal blood loss, 18 ga × 1
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 4–8 mL/h

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors

===== PAGE 1116 =====
1116   c h a p t e r 11.2     Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                          POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Pain management               PCA
                                                                   Oral medications for outpatients

                                     Tests                         As indicated by patient condition

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Hurwitz DJ, Holland SW: The L brachioplasty: an innovative approach to correct excess tissue of the upper arm, axilla, and
                                          lateral chest. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006; 117(2):403–11; discussion 412–3.
                                       2. Knoetgen J III, Moran SL: Long-term outcomes and complications associated with brachioplasty: a retrospective review and
                                          cadaveric study. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006; 117(7):2219–23.
                                       3. Lockwood TE: Brachioplasty with superficial fascial system suspension. Plast Reconstr Surg 1995; 96(4):912–20.

                                     ABDOMINOPLASTY
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Patients who present for abdominoplasty have laxity in the abdominal wall musculature and excess
                                     skin and adipose tissue. This laxity may be associated with rectus muscle diastasis. Liposuction often is performed
                                     before abdominoplasty to remove additional adipose tissue and improve contour.
                                     Incision lines are marked on the patient preoperatively in the upright position (Fig. 11.2-3). The umbilicus is cir-
                                     cumscribed, with care taken to preserve its blood supply. An incision is made above the pubic hairline and extended
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                                                                                                          –

                                               Figure 11.2-3. Abdominoplasty, markings for incisions. (Reproduced with permission
                                               from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM: Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition.
                                               Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1117 =====
Abdominoplasty   1117

                                Figure 11.2-4. After the lower incision has been made and the abdominal flap has
                                been elevated, the flap is pulled down to overlap the inferior incision, and the redundant
                                soft tissue is excised in a tailor-tack fashion. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ,
                                Beasley RW, Thorne CHM: Grabb & Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-
                                Raven: 1997).

                   bilaterally to each anterior-superior iliac spine. Electrocautery is used to raise a flap of skin, subcutaneous tissue,
                   and fat at the level of the abdominal wall fascia. The dissection extends cephalad to the costal margin. The operating
                   table is flexed to place the patient in the semi-Fowler position. The elevated flap is pulled down to overlap the inferior
                   incision, and the redundant soft tissue is excised in a tailor-tack fashion (Fig. 11.2-4). The surgical area is inspected
                   for hemostasis and irrigated. Sutures may be placed to plicate the abdominal wall musculature if there is laxity. F  ibrin
                   sealant may be sprayed to aid in hemostasis. The wound is closed over drains, and the umbilicus is brought out
                   through a new incision. Dressings, which may include an abdominal binder, are applied. The patient is maintained in
                   the semi-Fowler position during transfer from the operating table. The patient may elect to have the procedure as an
                   outpatient or with an overnight stay in a monitored facility.

                                                                                                                                                          Reconstructive Surgery
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Patients who require additional width reduction may have a fleur-de-lis ab-
                   dominoplasty (vertical midline extension of incision and scar). Panniculectomy (simple resection of overhanging

                                                                                                                                                               Plastic and
                   skin and soft tissue) can be performed alone without the fascial plication, particularly in the case of morbidly obese
                   patients. Mini-abdominoplasty may be performed in those patients who require less extensive dissection.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Abdominal wall laxity; rectus diastasis; lipodystrophy; redundant skin and soft tissue

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                     Supine

                     Incision                     Extended Pfannenstiel’s; periumbilical; vertical midline extension if needed

                     Unique considerations        Foley catheter; SCDs

                     Antibiotics                  Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time                1.5–4 h

                     Closing considerations       Flex table to facilitate closure; patient must subsequently remain in semi-Fowler position.

                     EBL                          ~100 mL, not including blood contained in specimen.

                     Postop care                  Maintain flexed position; avoid ketorolac in the first 24–48 h.

===== PAGE 1118 =====
1118   c h a p t e r 11.2   Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                      Mortality                   0–1%

                                      Morbidity                   Ileus: 10%
                                                                  Infection: 2–3%
                                                                  Dehiscence: 1%
                                                                  Fat embolism: 1%
                                                                  DVT: 1%
                                                                  Hematoma
                                                                  Seroma

                                      Pain score                  4–6

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age range                    20–65 yr

                                      Male:Female                  1:25

                                      Incidence                    115,902 performed in the United States in 2011

                                      Etiology                     Overweight; laxity of skin after pregnancy; massive weight loss

                                      Associated conditions        Obesity

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                         PREOPERATIVE
                                     Typically, there are two patient populations for abdominoplasty: the generally healthy and the morbidly obese. Some
                                     patients have Hx of amphetamine, cocaine, or thyroid hormone abuse and ↑ incidence of hiatal hernia. The follow-
                                     ing considerations focus on the morbidly obese patient (body weight ≥ 2 × ideal weight. Ideal body weight can be
                                     estimated by subtracting 100 (male) or 105 (female) from height in cm).

                                     Respiratory              In the morbidly obese patient, findings include: ↑ O2 consumption, ↑ CO2 production,
                                                              restrictive lung disease, ↓ FRC, ↓ ERV, ↓ VC, and ↓ PaO2. These changes are exacerbated
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                              by the supine position. Younger patients may show alveolar hyperventilation in response
                                                              to hypoxemia; older patients may not and may retain CO2. Patients may have obesity hy-
          Plastic and

                                                              poventilation syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome) and sleep apnea; with intermittent airway
                                                              obstruction, hypoxemia, and hypercarbia during sleep, which may → pulmonary HTN.
                                                              Obese patients are at ↑ risk of pulmonary aspiration due to ↑ incidence of hiatal hernia,
                                                              GERD, and ↑ gastric volumes (typically > 25 mL with pH < 2.5). See Premedication, below,
                                                              for aspiration prophylaxis.
                                                              Tests: Consider CXR, room-air ABG, and PFT (helpful, but generally do not predict po-
                                                              stop complications, e.g., atelectasis, pneumonia).

                                     Cardiovascular           ↑ CO and ↑ blood volume → LVH. Chronic hypoxia and pulmonary compromise may
                                                              produce right heart failure, ↓↓ exercise tolerance, ↑ risk of CAD, and pulmonary HTN.
                                                              Patients with LVH may have ↑ dysrhythmias. Some patients may have previously taken
                                                              fenfluramine alone or in combination with phentermine for weight loss. Those patients
                                                              should be evaluated for pulmonary HTN (e.g., dyspnea, central cyanosis, right axis devia-
                                                              tion, and CXR changes) and valvular heart disease.
                                                              Tests: ECG (↑ HR, conduction abnormalities, LVH); CXR (cardiomegaly)

                                     Metabolic                Increased incidence of diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, liver ab-
                                                              normalities, ↓ plasma folate, B12, ↑ incidence of cholelithiasis, nephrolithiasis. Determine
                                                              whether electrolyte abnormalities are present in patient s/p ileojejunal bypass.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 1119 =====
Abdominoplasty       1119

                    Hematologic            Polycythemia suggests chronic hypoxemia (see Respiratory, above).
                                           Tests: Hb/Hct

                    Laboratory             Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication          Sedative premedication is usually avoided in the morbidly obese due to their pulmonary
                                           compromise and increased sensitivity to sedative agents. Aspiration prophylaxis is use-
                                           ful: ranitidine 50 mg iv 30–60 min before surgery, plus nonparticulate antacid (Na citrate
                                           0.3 M, 30 mL po) preinduction. In addition, metoclopramide 10 mg iv may be given,
                                           although it has not been shown to be more effective in combination with an H2-blocker
                                           than the H2-blocker alone. For the healthy outpatient, midazolam 1–2 mg iv immediately
                                           before transport to the OR may lessen anxiety.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Morbidly obese patients may not tolerate the supine position for an extended period
                   of time. Consider placement of thoracic epidural for postop pain control.

                    Induction              Standard induction (see p. B-2) for healthy patients. Special considerations for the mor-
                                           bidly obese include prophylaxis for aspiration (see above), followed by rapid-sequence
                                           induction in an appropriately positioned patient (see Fig. 7.2-6). If mandibular and cer-
                                           vical mobility are decreased by excessive soft tissue, an awake fiberoptic intubation (see
                                           p. B-6) with the patient sitting may be necessary. Anticipate rapid O2 desaturation during
                                           periods of h
                                                       ypoventilation, even with adequate preoxygenation (e.g., 4 VC breaths of 100%
                                           O2 in 30 min).

                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Calculate most drug doses on basis of lean body mass.
                                           In the obese, increased plasma fluoride concentrations are found after anesthesia with
                                           volatile anesthetics; controlled ventilation with larger TVs, PEEP, and high inspired O2
                                           concentration is recommended. Because epinephrine infiltration generally is used to de-
                                           crease blood loss, isoflurane is recommended as the least dysrhythmogenic of the inhala-
                                           tion agents in the presence of epinephrine. *NB: Midazolam has a prolonged half-life in
                                           obese patients, but awakening times from inhalational or narcotic-based anesthetics are
                                           comparable to those of nonobese patients.

                    Emergence              Smooth emergence with minimal bucking, coughing, or retching to minimize tension on
                                           the suture line; give antiemetics (metoclopramide 10 mg and ondansetron 4 mg) 20 min be-

                                                                                                                                                   Reconstructive Surgery
                                           fore conclusion of surgery. Maintenance of flexed position will minimize tension on suture

                                                                                                                                                        Plastic and
                                           line. Small additional doses of narcotic (e.g., meperidine 10–20 mg) may be titrated to RR if
                                           patient is allowed to resume spontaneous respiration before the end of the case.

                    Blood and fluid        Moderate blood loss
                       requirements        IV: 16–18 ga × 1
                                           NS/LR @ 6–10 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                           ± Arterial line                        Additional monitoring for the morbidly obese
                                           ± CVP line                             patient may include arterial and CVP lines.

                    Positioning            Flexed position                        Flexed position minimizes tension on suture line.
                                           Pillows under knees                    Morbidly obese may require two OR tables side-
                                           ✓ and pad pressure points              by-side. Supine position may be poorly tolerated;
                                           ✓ eyes                                 monitor ventilation closely.

                    Complications          Fat emboli                             More common during liposuction.
                                           Rhabdomyolysis                         Increased risk with prolonged surgery.

===== PAGE 1120 =====
1120   c h a p t e r 11.2     Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                          POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications                 Patients may have postop ileus of       The morbidly obese should not be outpatients; they
                                                                   1- to 2-d duration.                     have an ↑ incidence of wound infection, DVT, PE,
                                                                                                           and postop pulmonary complications. Provide sup-
                                                                                                           plemental O2 for the first 2 d postop. Keep patient
                                                                                                           in semisitting or flexed position to avoid undue
                                                                                                           stress on wound.

                                     Pain management               Epidural narcotics or PCA may be        Monitor patient for postop respiratory depression.
                                                                   used (p. C-3).

                                     Tests                         Pulse oximetry                          Maximum reduction of arterial saturation may
                                                                                                           occur on postop day 2–3.

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Aldenkortt M, Lysakowski C, Elia N, Brochard L, Tramer MR: Ventilation strategies in obese patients undergoing surgery:
                                          a quantitative systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2012; 109(4):493–502.
                                       2. Dellon AL: Fleur-de-lis abdominoplasty. Aesth Plast Surg 1985; 9:27–32.
                                       3. Hatef DA, Trussler AP, Kenkel JM: Procedural risk for venous thromboembolism in abdominal contouring surgery:
                                          a systematic review of the literature. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010; 125(1):352–62.
                                       4. Joshi GP, Ankichetty SP, Gan TJ, Chung F: Society for ambulatory anesthesia consensus statement on preoperative selection
                                          of adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea scheduled for ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(5):1060–8.
                                       5. Kirkham L, Thomas M: Anaesthesia in obese patients. Br J Hosp Med (Lond) 2011; 72(9):515–20.
                                       6. Michaels, BN, Eko FN: Outpatient abdominoplasty facilitated by rib blocks. Plastic Reconstr Surg 2009; 124(4):635–42.
                                       7. Peterson PL, et al: The transversus abdominis plane block: a valuable option for postoperative analgesia? A topical review.
                                          Acta Anaesthsiol Scand 2010; 54(3):529–35.
                                       8. Schumann R: Anaesthesia for bariatric surgery. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2011; 25(1):83–93.
                                       9. Staalesen T, Elander A, Strandell A, Bergh C: A systematic review of outcomes of abdominoplasty. J Plast Surg Hand Surg
                                          2012; 46(3–4):139–44.

                                     BODY LIFTS
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
          Plastic and

                                     Description: With heightened awareness of the importance of nutrition and exercise as well as the advent of improved
                                     gastric bypass and restriction techniques, more patients with massive weight loss are presenting to plastic surgeons
                                     for treatment of the resultant skin excess and laxity. Patients frequently have multiple areas of concern, from the face
                                     (see Facelifts) to the breasts (see Mastopexy) to the abdomen and thighs. Often patients will require circumferential
                                     torsoplasty (combining Abdominoplasty with a modified buttocks lift) and/or extensive lower body work (medial
                                     and lateral thigh lifts). All of these body lift procedures may be combined with liposuction for a dditional contouring.
                                     The patient is marked in the standing position in the preoperative holding area. Depending on surgeon preference,
                                     the initial operative position may begin supine, lateral decubitus, or prone. Incisions are made, and the marked ex-
                                     cess skin and soft tissues are elevated and excised. The patient’s position is changed as needed to allow for access to
                                     all of the surgical areas. Drains are placed. During wound closure, care is taken to close in several layers, beginning
                                     with the strength layer of the superficial fascial system. Dressings are applied, and compression garments or ACE
                                     wraps may also be used. The patient may elect to have the procedure as an outpatient but frequently choose so stay
                                     overnight in a monitored facility.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Thigh and buttock laxity; lipodystrophy; redundant skin and soft tissue

===== PAGE 1121 =====
Body Lifts     1121

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                    Multiple: supine, lateral decubitus, prone

                     Incision                    Depending on the combination of procedures; may include circumferential waistline,
                                                 transverse groin crease, possible medial thigh vertical extension

                     Unique considerations       Foley catheter; knee-high SCDs; appropriate pressure point padding

                     Antibiotics                 Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Surgical time               2–6 h

                     EBL                         50–100 mL, not including blood contained in specimen

                     Postop care                  Avoid ketorolac in the first 24–48 h; maintain semi-Fowler position for any procedures
                                                 involving abdominoplasty

                     Mortality                   Minimal

                     Morbidity                   Seroma: 1–16%
                                                 Dehiscence: 1–32%
                                                 Skin necrosis: 1–10%
                                                 Infection: 0.5–3.5%
                                                 DVT/PE: 2–3%

                     Pain score                  4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                      20–65 yr

                     Male:Female                    1:4

                     Incidence                      Thigh lift: 9761 performed in the United States in 2011
                                                    Lower body lift: 7615 performed in the United States in 2011

                     Etiology                       Overweight; massive weight loss

                     Associated conditions          Obesity

                                                                                                                                                                Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                     Plastic and
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Patients may have had massive weight loss or may be morbidly obese. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Abdomino-
                   plasty, p. 1118). Body lift procedures may be combined with liposuction. (See Anesthetic Considerations, see p. 1123)

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Capella JF: Body lift. Clin Plast Surg 2008; 35(1):27–51.
                     2. Nemerofsky RB, Oliak DA, Capella JF: Body lift: an account of 200 consecutive cases in the massive weight loss patient. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2006; 117(2):414–30.
                     3. Rohrich RJ, Gosman AA, Conrad MH, et al: Simplifying circumferential body contouring: the central body lift evolution.
                        Plast Reconstr Surg 2006; 118(2):525–35; discussion 536–8.
                     4. Shermak MA: Body contouring. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 129(6):963e–78e.
                     5. Shermak MA: Pearls and perils of caring for the postbariatric body contouring patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012;
                        130(4):586e–97e.
                     6. Strauch B, Herman C, Rohde C, et al: Mid-body contouring in the post-bariatric surgery patient. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006;
                        117(7):2200–11.

===== PAGE 1122 =====
1122   c h a p t e r 11.2     Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                     LIPOSUCTION
                                     George W. Commons, MD
                                     Body contour surgery remains one of the most commonly performed cosmetic surgical procedures in North America.
                                     The surgical techniques used to achieve body contour change continue to evolve. The use of epinephrine-containing
                                     wetting solutions injected in the subcutaneous tissue prior to aspiration of fat has dramatically reduced periopera-
                                     tive blood loss and allowed the surgeon to achieve a more dramatic body contour change. New technologies con-
                                     tinue to be developed that may achieve a better cosmetic outcome with less tissue trauma and fewer complications.
                                     Randomized controlled studies comparing differing technologies and surgical techniques have yet to be performed.
                                     Perioperative surgical and anesthetic complications continue to occur during liposuction surgery. Adverse outcome
                                     associated with body contour surgery includes pulmonary embolus, fat emboli, fluid overload from intravenous fluid
                                     and use of the wetting solution, and local anesthetic toxicity from the wetting solution. Careful coordination of the
                                     surgical procedure with all members of the surgical team is mandatory to ensure patient safety.
                                     Confirmation of the planned surgical procedure, review of the planned volume of injection of wetting solution, and the
                                     composition of the wetting solution must be done prior to the start of surgery. Local anesthetic dosing errors during
                                     liposuction have led to complications and death during liposuction surgery. Current surgical techniques in liposuction
                                     involve the injection of dilute solutions of epinephrine into the subcutaneous fat prior to the start of fat disruption to re-
                                     duce perioperative blood loss. Although the epinephrine component of the wetting solution causes vasoconstriction and
                                     reduces blood loss, the local anesthetic added to the wetting solution reduces intraop anesthetic requirements and pro-
                                     vides postop analgesia. The wetting solution is compounded by adding 200–500 mg of lidocaine and 1 mg of epinephrine
                                     to a 1 L bag of lactated Ringer’s. The final epinephrine concentration of 1:1,000,000 provides enough vasoconstriction to
                                     reduce blood loss to 2–8% of the total volume of lipoaspirate obtained. Higher concentrations of local anesthetic may
                                     be necessary for patient comfort for surgery performed without general or regional anesthesia as the primary anesthetic
                                     technique. Adequate time (10 min or longer) after injection of the wetting solution must be given for epinephrine-in-
                                     duced vasoconstriction to take effect. Excessive blood loss during liposuction may occur after failure to add epinephrine
                                     to the wetting solution, the use of larger diameter liposuction cannulae or accidental blood vessel puncture.
                                     External ultrasound/internal ultrasound/laser: The application of energy sources to disrupt the integrity of fat
                                     tissue prior to aspiration may be used to achieve improvements in body contour. Anecdotal reports of improvement
                                     in cellulite of the skin in the liposuction area after laser/ultrasound energy have been published. Disruption of fat
                                     tissue with ultrasound or laser prior to aspiration reduces the physical work of the surgical procedure. Complications
                                     reported with the use of ultrasound or laser include seroma formation, increased blood loss, skin loss secondary to
                                     burn, and body cavity perforation with the energy applying cannula.
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     Small incisions are made in strategic locations to hide scars. Prefabricated wound protection inserts may be used to
                                     protect the skin from cannula irritation. Following completion of the surgery, depending on the degree of surgery and
          Plastic and

                                     the comfort of the patient. Postop pain is highly variable depending on surgical area and the magnitude of the surgi-
                                     cal procedure. Oral analgesics starting with opioids and rapidly tapering to nonnarcotic analgesics over the course of
                                     1–2 wk are usually satisfactory.
                                     Ultrasonic energy is now being used for the treatment of axillary osmidrosis (hyperhidrosis). Use of the ultrasonic
                                     probe in the superficial planes of the skin of the axilla has successfully treated hyperhidrosis. The procedure may be
                                     performed under local anesthesia or general anesthesia.

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                      Position                  According to body region (repositioning during surgery is common)

                                      Incision                  Incisions may be hidden in skin folds and by clothing. Long infusion cannulas and long liposuction
                                                                probes help minimize the number of incisions necessary.

                                      Special                   Specialized laser cannulas, ultrasonic probes, and power assisting equipment. Suction machines
                                        instrumentation         and canisters used to aspirate and collect fat.

                                      Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                      Surgical time             2–9 h depending on the volume of resection and the number of surgical sites

                                      EBL                       2–8% of total aspirate volume when using epinephrine-containing wetting solution before aspiration

===== PAGE 1123 =====
Liposuction   1123

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care             PACU for small-volume liposuction; hospitalization for postop monitoring for resection volume
                                             > 5–6 L of fat depending on body size of the patient and the number of regions of the body
                                            undergoing surgery.

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Pulmonary emboli, fat emboli, fluid overload, local anesthetic toxicity, body cavity perforation,
                                            skin burn, and tissue loss from ultrasonic energy application or tissue trauma from lipo cannula

                     Unique                 Wetting solution must be warmed before infiltration to prevent hypothermia, Foley catheter should
                       considerations       be used during larger-volume surgeries to monitor fluid status and prevent bladder distension.
                                            TEDs, SCDs used on all cases. Postop use of anticoagulant drugs during the first week may lead
                                            to excessive bleeding. IVC filter considered for patient with pulmonary embolus postop.

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                     Teens–70 yr

                     Female:Male                   10:1

                     Etiology                      Quest for eternal youth

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Bruce D. Halperin, MD
                         Preoperative
                   Patients considering liposuction should be ASA category I or II. The ideal candidate for surgery should be physically
                   active and have maintained a stable body weight for 6 mo–1 yr. Current techniques use the injection of wetting solu-
                   tion into the fat prior to aspiration to reduce blood loss and to deliver local anesthetic for postop analgesia. Most
                   wetting solutions contain lidocaine 200–500 mg/L combined with epinephrine 1 mg/L (1/1,000,000). Typically, 1 mL
                   of wetting solution will be injected for each 1 mL of anticipated fat resection. Determining the maximum amount of
                   fat that is safe to remove in one surgical setting is complex. Safety is partially determined by the size of the patient
                   and the number or surgical regions planned to have liposuction. Large-volume (> 5000 mL) resection may require

                                                                                                                                                         Reconstructive Surgery
                   overnight medical observation and monitoring (fluid shifts, drop in Hct, fluid overload). Large volumes of wetting
                   solution are often used in these procedures and require limiting iv fluid administration. In contrast, small-volume

                                                                                                                                                              Plastic and
                   liposuction often requires larger volumes of iv fluid administration because of the small volumes of wetting solution
                   that would be available for postop redistribution from the fat tissue into the central circulation. Performing several
                   small-volume resections may be preferable than a single very large resection given concerns with fluid shifts, blood
                   loss, respiratory compromise, and local anesthetic toxicity.

                    Respiratory              Postop discomfort following chest, upper back, and upper abdomen liposuction may in-
                                             terfere with respiration. Restrictive compression garments applied to the chest or upper
                                             abdomen may also restrict breathing. Patients with respiratory impairment may not be
                                             candidates for this procedure. Careful postop monitoring of O2 saturation is mandatory.

                    Cardiovascular           Patients with a history of cardiac dysfunction will not be candidates for liposuction. Fluid
                                             management is based on estimation of the patient’s intravascular volume status, the vol-
                                             ume of tumescent (wetting) fluid injected during surgery, and the quantity of iv fluid given.
                                             Tumescent solution injected into the subcutaneous tissue is absorbed over 48 h. Postop
                                             pulmonary edema has been reported secondary to fluid overload. Regional anesthesia may
                                             make perioperative fluid management more difficult in large-volume surgeries secondary
                                             to peripheral vasodilation. Large doses of epinephrine may lead to increases in blood pres-
                                             sure and cardiac arrhythmias. After tumescent injection, epinephrine levels peak at 5–6 h
                                             vs. 10–12 h for local anesthetic levels.

===== PAGE 1124 =====
1124   c h a p t e r 11.2    Nonfacial Aesthetic Surgery

                                     Neurologic                Preop neurologic exam should be normal. Local anesthetic in the wetting solution may
                                                               cause numbness in the surgical region for several hours after surgery. Nerve trauma caused
                                                               by the liposuction instruments has been reported. Careful body positioning during surgery
                                                               is mandatory as the patient’s position on the operating room table is frequently changed
                                                               during the course of the surgery. Repeated checking of the patient’s body position on the
                                                               table is needed because of the vigorous motion of the liposuction procedure.

                                     Hematologic               Vasoconstriction from epinephrine-containing wetting solutions reduces blood loss to 2–8%
                                                               of the total aspirate volume. Heavy bleeding during liposuction should cause the procedure
                                                               to be halted and the cause of bleeding investigated. Failure to add epinephrine to the wetting
                                                               solution as a cause of bleeding has been reported. Blood vessel injury, accidental puncture of
                                                               a body cavity, or unknown coagulopathy may be the cause of increased blood loss.
                                                               Tests: Hct, PT, PTT, platelet count

                                     Laboratory                No other preop testing is needed in healthy patients.

                                     Premedication             Midazolam 1–2 mg iv or lorazepam 1 mg po 1–2 h preop

                                          Intraoperative
                                     Anesthetic technique: Local anesthesia may be suitable for smaller-volume liposuction. New technology
                                     (laser, ultrasound) claims decreased pain during surgery, but that has yet to be objectively confirmed. Regional anes-
                                     thesia (spinal, epidural) may be used when the surgical regions are appropriate for this type of anesthetic. Concerns
                                     have been raised because of vasodilation causing an increase in blood loss and an increased risk of fat embolization.
                                     Adding local anesthetics to an epidural catheter in combination with local anesthetic in the wetting solution requires
                                     careful planning to avoid local anesthetic toxicity. GA ensures patient comfort and allows liposuction to be per-
                                     formed on all body regions. Control of the airway and control of ventilation provide safety during surgery, particu-
                                     larly for patients in the prone position. SCDs or foot/ankle compression devices are used for all patients to reduce the
                                     risk of PE. Routine use of 1 or 2 forced air thermal blankets to maintain normal body temperature is recommended.

                                      Induction                   Standard induction (see pp. B-2). Steroids (dexamethasone 8 mg) may be used to
                                                                 r educe postop swelling, reduce the incidence of postop nausea, and may be of benefit in
                                                                  the event of fat embolism.

                                      Maintenance                Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) with volatile anesthetics or propofol infusion.
                                                                 Neuromuscular blockade as appropriate. GA is maintained during application of
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                                  compression garments at the end of the procedure.
          Plastic and

                                      Emergence                  Antiemetic prophylaxis with combination drug therapy (metoclopramide 10–20 mg)
                                                                 and ondansetron (4 mg) is appropriate. Careful monitoring of respiratory function is
                                                                 necessary when surgery has been performed on the chest, back, or upper abdomen be-
                                                                 cause compression garments and postop pain may limit respiration.

                                      Blood and fluid            IV: 18 or 20 ga ×1 NS/LR       Fluid administration determined by the needs of the case.
                                         requirements                                           Open surgery (abdominoplasty) performed in combina-
                                                                                                tion with liposuction will require careful monitoring of
                                                                                                intravascular status and monitoring of urine output dur-
                                                                                                ing surgery. Transfusion rarely needed, diuretics (furose-
                                                                                                mide 5–10 mg) may be needed for patients receiving large
                                                                                                volumes of wetting solution. Larger intravenous fluid vol-
                                                                                                umes are needed during smaller-volume liposuction be-
                                                                                                cause less wetting solution has been used. IV fluids may
                                                                                                need to be limited in patients undergoing larger-volume
                                                                                                liposuction because larger volumes of wetting solution
                                                                                                will be absorbed into the circulation.

                                      Monitoring                 Standard monitoring            Urine output monitoring mandatory on all large-volume
                                                                 Foley catheter                 lipo cases. Careful temperature monitoring.

===== PAGE 1125 =====
Liposuction      1125

                    Positioning                 ✓ and pad pressure points         Frequent intraop position checks are needed as patient
                                                ✓ and protect eyes while in       position may change during surgery → ↑ risk of peripheral
                                                prone position                    nerve injury. Document eye checks Q 15 min while
                                                Repeat positioning check         patients are in the prone position.
                                                frequently.

                    Complications               Local anesthetic toxicity        Lidocaine in a dose of 35 mg/kg in the wetting solution
                                                Excessive blood loss             with epinephrine 1,000,000 has been shown to produce
                                                Volume overload                  safe serum levels when used for tumescent injection
                                                Abdominal cavity                 during liposuction. Peak plasma lidocaine levels occur
                                                  perforation                    10–12 h after infusion. Peak epinephrine levels occur
                                                Peripheral nerve injury          5–6 h after infusion and may lead to increases in heart
                                                Hypothermia                      rate and/or blood pressure.
                                                Fat embolism                     Postop hypoxia may be caused by multiple factors, includ-
                                                Pulmonary embolism               ing fluid overload and pulmonary edema, pneumothorax,
                                                                                 restricted ventilation, pulmonary embolus, respiratory
                                                                                 depression. Unexplained postop hypoxia will require hos-
                                                                                 pitalization. Anticoagulation for PE may lead to severe
                                                                                 blood loss because of large tissue areas that have been
                                                                                 injured during liposuction. Blood transfusion must be
                                                                                  readily available before beginning anticoagulation therapy
                                                                                  in a patient who has recently undergone liposuction. Infe-
                                                                                  rior vena caval filter may be needed for a patient with PE.
                                                                                  Hypertention may be caused by fluid overload, epineph-
                                                                                  rine effect, or surgery-induced pain.

                    Pain                        PO analgesics                    Patients often will be comfortable 2° to residual local an-
                      management                IV opiates                       esthesia that may persist for 8–24 h. Oral analgesics are
                                                                                 usually satisfactory for postop pain control.

                    Tests                       Rarely needed, Hct

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Blugerman G, Schavelzon D, Paul M: A safety and feasibility study of a novel radiofrequency-assisted liposuction. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2010; 125(3):998.
                     2. Burk RW III, Guzman-Stein G, Vasconez LO: Lidocaine and epinephrine levels in tumescent technique liposuction. Plast

                                                                                                                                                             Reconstructive Surgery
                        Reconstr Surg 1996; 97:1379.
                     3. Commons GW, Chang CC, Vistnes D, Halperin BD: Role of liposuction in morbid obesity. In: Problems in General Surgery.

                                                                                                                                                                  Plastic and
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.
                     4. Commons GW, Halperin BD, Chang CC: Large volume liposuction: a review of 631 consecutive cases over 12 years. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2001; 108:1753.
                     5. Commons GW, Halperin BD: Considerations in large volume liposuction. Sem Plast Surg 2002; 16(2).
                     6. Do DV, Kelley LC: Tumescent anesthesia: evolution and current uses. Adv Dermatol 2007; 23:33–46.
                     7. Gilliland M, Commons GW, Halperin BD: Safety issues in ultrasonic assisted large volume lipoplasty. Clin Plast Surg 1999;
                        26(2):317–35.
                     8. Grazer FM, deJong RH: Fatal outcomes from liposuction: census survey of cosmetic surgeons. Plast Reconstr Surg 2000;
                        105(1);436–48.
                     9. Hunstand JP: Body contouring in the obese patient. Clin Plast Surg 1996; 23(4):647–70.
                    10. Kenkel JM, et al: Hemodynamic physiology and thermoregulation in liposuction. Plast Reconstr Surg 2004 Aug; 114(2):503–13.
                    11. Kenkel JM, Spencer AB, Love EJ, et al: Hemodynamics, electrolytes, and organ histology of larger-volume liposuction in a
                        porcine model. Plast Reconstr Surg 2004; 113:1391.
                    12. Kim YH, Cha SM, Shenthilkumar N, Hwang WJ: Analysis of postoperative complications for superficial liposuction: a review
                        of 2,398 cases. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 127:863.
                    13. Lipschitz AH, Kenkel JM, Luby M, et al: Electrolyte and plasma enzyme analyses during large-volume liposuction. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2004; 114:766.
                    14. Meister F: Possible association between tumescent technique and life-threatening pulmonary complications. Clin Plast Surg
                        1996; 23:642.
                    15. Rohrick RJ, Leedy JE, Swamy R, Brown SA, Coleman J: Fluid resuscitation in liposuction: a retrospective review of 89
                        consecutive patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006; 117(2):431–5.

===== PAGE 1126 =====
c h a p t e r

                          11.3 Craniofacial
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeon
                                           Stephen A. Schendel, MD, DDS, FACS

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Richard A. Jaffe, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 1128 =====
REPAIR OF FACIAL FRACTURES
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Facial fractures are classified by location and the involved bones.
                                     Upper and midface region: Frontal sinus fractures may involve the anterior wall alone or also may involve the
                                     nasofrontal ducts and/or posterior wall. Nasofrontal duct disruption may require obliteration of the duct and
                                     sinus, which is done with an electric burr and loupe magnification to remove all mucosa before grafting the area
                                     with bone, fat, or pericranium. A posterior wall disruption is a fracture into the anterior cranial fossa that may
                                     require CSF leak repair ± cranialization of the sinus (complete removal of the posterior wall of the sinus). Each
                                     frontal bone forms a large component of the orbital roof, and as such, ocular injury or periorbital entrapment must
                                     be considered.
                                     Fractures of the maxilla are classified as LeFort I, II, or III, depending on the level of the fracture (Fig. 11.3-2). Le-
                                     Fort I is a horizontal fracture, separating the teeth and lower maxillary components from the upper facial structures.
                                     LeFort II is a triangular fracture with a fracture line across the nose, below the infraorbital rims, and extending
                                     through the entire lower maxillary structures. LeFort III is essentially a disassociation of the cranium and face. In
                                     these cases, the maxilla is usually mobile or impacted posteriorly and occasionally closes off the posterior airway.
                                     Further mobility of the segments may be present with a sagittal split of the palate. Associated fractures in the maxil-
                                     lary region include fractures of the zygoma, orbital fractures (most commonly orbital floor), isolated nasal fractures,
                                     naso-orbital-ethmoid (NOE) fractures (usually with severe comminution of the upper face), and cranial base frac-
                                     tures with the potential for dural tears and CSF rhinorrhea. Added procedures which may be required to complete
                                     the repair of these fractures include local flap closure of a CSF leak and primary bone grafting, usually from cra-
                                     nium or distant sites, such as the ilium, to highly comminuted areas (e.g., NOE, orbital floors).
                                     Lower face: Fractures of the mandible are classified by the type of fracture and location (Fig. 11.3-3), the most
                                     common being the subcondylar fracture. Fractures involving the mandibular body, such as a parasymphyseal frac-
                                     ture, may result in unstable mandibular segments. In cases of bilateral mandibular body fractures associated with
                                     symphyseal fractures, the mandible can be flail and fall posteriorly in the supine position, allowing the tongue to
                                     block off the airway. All of the fractures involving change in occlusion (LeFort maxillary and all mandibular fractures)
                                     require reestablishment of a normal occlusion by the application of arch bars and wires also called intermaxillary
                                     fixation (IMF). This may be combined with rigid fixation, most commonly internal plates. In some cases, rigid fixa-
                                     tion will allow removal of the IMF at the end of the case; in others, IMF may be required for postop healing. Removal
                                     of the throat pack prior to final IMF is of paramount importance.
                                     Trismus may be associated with any of the above injuries 2° direct injury to the muscles of mastication but is more
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     commonly associated with fractures of these muscular attachments (e.g., mandible, zygoma). Associated dentoal-
          Plastic and

                                     veolar fractures of the maxilla or mandible may require preop wiring in the ER. The intent is to hold steady those
                                     segments with tenuous stability and blood supply. Intubation techniques should avoid displacing these segments.
                                     Fractures not involving change in occlusion (e.g., orbital zygomatic, nasal fracture) can be orally intubated. Most
                                     fractures with a change in occlusion should be nasally intubated with RAE or 60° curved connector. Exceptions
                                     include edentulous segments allowing tube to pass versus edentulous patient with a splint fabricated for oral intuba-
                                     tion. Another preop consideration is the amount of blood loss at the scene or in the ER. Facial and scalp vessels can
                                     bleed profusely (hypovolemia), and patients may arrive in the OR with both anterior and posterior nasal packs in
                                     place (difficult ventilation).
                                     The surgical approach depends on the extent of fractures and associated lacerations. Periorbital incisions can be
                                     external, on or below the lower eyelid and over the brow, or internal, along the lower eyelid conjunctiva. Upper facial
                                     repair may include a bicoronal approach (Fig. 11.3-4) designed to peel the face off the upper facial skeleton via an ear-
                                     to-ear scalp incision. Rainey clips are used to minimize scalp bleeding. Of note, periorbital dissection to explore and
                                     repair NOE or orbital floor fractures involves some retraction on the globe. This may cause ↓ HR and ↓ BP via the
                                     oculocardiac reflex. The mandible can be approached through external, preauricular or inferior border, or intraoral
                                     incisions. A panfacial fracture treatment protocol is illustrated in Figure 11.3-1.
                                     Variant procedure or approaches: Endoscopic approaches are being developed for multiple fracture sites.
                                     Resorbable plates and screws, especially for pediatric cases, can be applied through the same surgical approaches.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Facial trauma

                              1128

===== PAGE 1129 =====
A

                                                                                                  B

                                       D                                                                                 C

                                                            E

                                                                                                                                                Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                     Plastic and
                                             F

                   Figure 11.3-1. Panfacial fracture treatment protocol, based on reconstructing load-bearing structures of the
                   facial skeleton. A: Projection of the midface is created by reconstructing the zygomatic arches, starting from
                   the stable part of the temporal bone. B: The zygomas are fixed to the arches and to the frontal bone to create
                   the final projection of the midface. C: The width of the midface is reconstructed by repositioning the central
                   midface (orbits and nose) to its correct position, in relation to the zygomas and frontal bone. Concomitantly,
                   canthopexy is fixed, and the frontal bone and sinus fractures are treated. (This procedure is independent of the
                   occlusion.) D: The posterior vertical height of the face is reconstructed by positioning and fixing the condylar
                   fractures. E: Intermaxillary fixation is applied, and the mandible is reconstructed. F: Finally, the LeFort I-level
                   fractures are positioned to natural occlusion. (Reproduced with permission from Booth PW, Schendel SA,
                   Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 1130 =====
1130   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                                               A

                                                                B
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                                                 C

                                              Figure 11.3-2. Schematic of the LeFort fracture lines. A: LeFort III involves
                                              separation of cranium from facial bone structure. B: LeFort II is a pyramid-shaped
                                              fracture, including the dentition and nasal structures. C: LeFort I is a horizontal
                                              fracture involving mobilization of dentition and maxilla. (Reproduced with permission
                                              from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                                              Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 1131 =====
Repair of Facial Fractures   1131

                                                 A

                                                 B

                               Figure 11.3-3. A: Anatomic regions of the mandible and B: frequency of fractures in
                               those regions. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH,
                               eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia:
                               1997.)

                                                                                                                                        Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                             Plastic and
                                                    Reflected
                                                   pericranium

                                                                        Reflected zygoma
                                                                           periosteum

                               Figure 11.3-4. Bicoronal approach. (Reproduced with permission from Booth
                               PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                               Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 1132 =====
1132   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                                            A2

                                                                                                                       A1
                                                                       An
                                                                                1

                                                 Figure 11.3-5. Standard anesthesia and surgical setup for a maxillofacial surgical
                                                 procedure and certain craniofacial surgical procedures. The table may be rotated
                                                 90°–180° with anesthesia equipment and personnel at the foot or off to one side.
                                                 (Reproduced with permission from Bell WH, ed: Modern Practice of Orthognathic
                                                 Surgery, Vol I. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1990.)

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Mandibular                            Maxillary Orbital/Zygomatic          Nasal

                                      Position               Supine                                ⇐                                    ⇐

                                      Incision               Intraoral; lateral, submandibular     Intraoral, ± subciliary; possibly    Closed reduction;
                                                                                                   coronal                              possibly intranasal

                                      Special                Air power tools; plate fixation;      ⇐ + Periorbital malleable retrac-    ⇐
                                        instrumentation      headlight                             tors; Rowe disimpaction forceps;
                                                                                                   acrylic dental split

                                      Unique                 Nasal RAE (sutured to dentition or    Panfacial smash; airway swelling     —
                                        considerations       septum); throat pack; corticoste-     associated with head injury; burns
                                                             roids periop to ↓ edema.              or other system involvement. Con-
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                                                                   sider preop tracheostomy. Close
                                                                                                   monitoring for and removal of
          Plastic and

                                                                                                   stimulus until oculocardiac reflex
                                                                                                   recovery.

                                      Antibiotics, etc.      Cefazolin 1 g iv                      ⇐ + Methylprednisolone 125 mg        ⇐
                                                                                                   iv (adults)

                                      Surgical time          1–3 h                                 1–6 h (bicoronal approach adds       1h
                                                                                                   1.5 h)

                                      Closing                NG at end of procedure, main-         ⇐                                    —
                                        considerations       tained for 24 h; IMF postop;
                                                             NB: Throat pack removal.

                                      EBL                    100–800 mL, depending on ex-          ⇐                                    ⇐
                                                             tent of fractures, need for graft
                                                             harvest, patient age

                                      Postop care            Airway or respiratory status may      ⇐                                    ⇐
                                                             be compromised (preop and post-
                                                             op swelling/aspiration/associated
                                                             injuries), requiring maintenance of
                                                             intubation → ICU.

===== PAGE 1133 =====
Repair of Facial Fractures     1133

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                            Mandibular                            Maxillary Orbital/Zygomatic             Nasal

                     Mortality              Minimal (↑ due to associated          ⇐                                       ⇐
                                            injuries and blood loss)

                     Morbidity              Trismus                               ⇐                                       –
                                            Poor occlusion                        ⇐                                       –
                                            Drooling                              ⇐                                       –
                                            Poor cosmetic result                  ⇐                                       ⇐
                                            Chronic pain/sensation changes        ⇐                                       ⇐
                                            Loss of taste                         Loss of smell                           ⇐
                                                                                  Visual problems/epiphora                –
                                                                                  Sinus problems                          ⇐
                                                                                  Breathing difficulty                    ⇐

                     Pain score             4–8                                   4–8                                     4–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              > 4 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1 (varies by age group)

                     Incidence              The most common are nasal bones, zygoma and arch, mandible, and orbital floor (on the rise
                                            due to airbags in autos).

                     Etiology               Adults: Motor vehicle accidents (MVAs), mostly young males (43–67%); assaults (13–48.8%);
                                            sports-related (3.8%); falls (3.6%); gunshot wounds (3%)
                                            Children: Uncommon: only ~5% of all facial fractures occur in ages < 12 yr; falls (33%); MVA
                                            (28%); abuse (3%); dog bites (rare). 69% are periorbital or nasal.

                     Associated             Airway compromise/closed head trauma (40%); extremity fractures (33%); thoracic injury (29%);
                       conditions           open or radiographic brain injury (25%); intraabdominal (12%); globe injuries (11%); oral trauma
                                            (11%); pelvic fractures (10%); C-spine fractures (4–10%); T-L spine injuries (4%); shock; multisys-
                                            tem trauma; burns; massive soft-tissue loss. Mandibular fractures during MVAs are associated
                                            with a 65% incidence of life-threatening injuries and mortality of up to 8%; up to 1/3 of LeFort
                                            fractures will require intubation, most often due to upper respiratory tract blood and secretions.

                                                                                                                                                          Reconstructive Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                               Plastic and
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The forces required to produce facial fractures are considerable and frequently result in other associated trauma (e.g.,
                   closed head trauma; spine injuries; thoracic injury, including pneumothorax and myocardial contusion; intraabdomi-
                   nal bleeding). Soft-tissue injury to the tongue or larynx can make airway management difficult. When in doubt, a
                   tracheostomy under local anesthesia or awake intubation should be considered. In mandible or maxillary fractures,
                   nasal intubation is usually best because the patient will be placed in intermaxillary fixation (IMF; teeth brought to-
                   gether via wires or rubber bands) at the conclusion of the procedure. In malar or nasal bone fractures, the fixation
                   may be precarious, making it undesirable to use mask ventilation at the termination of the procedure and necessitat-
                   ing awake extubation. Facial nerve monitoring may be required, contraindicating the use of muscle relaxants.
                   Frequently, the anesthesiologist’s first encounter with these patients is in the ER, where prompt airway management
                   decisions are essential—often before diagnostic imaging studies are complete. These patients should be treated with
                   full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5) and may have already aspirated. Patients may be unable to open their mouths
                   2° pain or mechanical factors. The cause of limited mouth opening should be determined before induction of anes-
                   thesia. Several options exist. Often, the airway can be managed simply by inserting an oropharyngeal airway; failing
                   this, an emergency intubation will be necessary. Blind nasal intubation should be avoided in patients with CSF rhi-
                   norrhea or other evidence of nasopharyngeal trauma, where the potential for creating false passages and additional
                   trauma is significant. An awake oral intubation with topical anesthesia is often the safest approach. Emergency oral

===== PAGE 1134 =====
1134   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                     intubation may be complicated by an unstable C-spine and limited jaw opening, together with blood and debris in
                                     the oropharynx, making visualization difficult if not impossible. Often the only recourse is tracheostomy under local
                                     anesthesia. As with any trauma victim, attention is first directed toward maintaining the airway and restoration of
                                     fluid volume. The repair of the facial fracture may be carried out incidental to the primary trauma surgery or, more
                                     often, is deferred until the patient’s condition is stabilized. The following preop assessment will focus primarily on
                                     the patient coming to the OR for semielective repair of a facial fracture.

                                     Airway                    Semielective: Usually, facial swelling and intraoral bleeding will have resolved, although
                                                               mouth opening may be limited 2° pain or mechanical factors. Airway management re-
                                                               quires knowledge of the fracture site(s). Patients with a maxillary fracture may benefit
                                                               from an oral intubation to allow inspection of the nasopharynx before nasal intubation
                                                               and definitive repair. The possibility of an awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6) should
                                                               be discussed with the patient. Patients with an isolated orbital, zygomatic, or nasal fracture
                                                               usually do not present airway management problems. The surgeon should be consulted
                                                               regarding the preferred intubation route.
                                                               Trauma: Airway and nasal obstruction following trauma can be extreme, as a result of
                                                               soft-tissue swelling and accumulated blood and secretions. The extent of facial fractures,
                                                               particularly in the midface, should be identified as they may preclude nasal intubation.
                                                               Mandibular fractures may make access to the oropharynx difficult. Unstable dentoalveolar
                                                               fractures may require preop wiring in the ER. In the case of massive trauma to the face,
                                                               urgent tracheostomy should be considered.
                                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                     Respiratory               Trauma: Evaluate for associated trauma and respiratory insufficiency 2° aspiration. 3 that
                                                               chest tubes are functioning properly.
                                                               Tests: CXR; others as indicated from H&P

                                     Cardiovascular            Semielective: Typically, several days will have elapsed since the initial trauma, and the
                                                               patient should be hemodynamically stable.
                                                               Trauma: Blunt chest trauma may be associated with myocardial contusion, pericardial ef-
                                                               fusion/tamponade, and aortic tear/dissection.
                                                               Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                                     Neurological              Semielective: Document any neurological deficits and altered mental status. Meningitis
                                                               may occur in patients with persistent CSF rhinorrhea or pneumocephalus.
                                                               Trauma: Intracranial injury may be associated with facial fractures. Patients with head
                                                               trauma may have ↑ ICP; therefore, appropriate methods (e.g., CO2 ↓, fluid ↓, smooth in-
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                               duction/intubation) are used to prevent further ↑ ICP. Basilar skull fractures preclude pas-
                                                               sage of nasotracheal and NG tubes. In the presence of otorrhea or rhinorrhea, positive-
          Plastic and

                                                               pressure mask ventilation is inadvisable due to the potential for causing pneumocephalus.
                                                               Tests: Review skull and C-spine x-rays.

                                     Musculoskeletal           Semielective: May be associated with other fractures and soft-tissue trauma that may af-
                                                               fect patient positioning.
                                                               Trauma: C-spine injuries are commonly associated with facial injuries. The C-spine should
                                                               be cleared by clinical and x-ray exam before transport to OR. If C-spine cannot be cleared,
                                                               intubation should be done with the head in a neutral position (splinted or with axial stabi-
                                                               lization), using direct FOL (see p. B-6).

                                     Hematologic               Trauma: Maxillary surgery may be associated with major blood loss. For elective cases,
                                                               autologous donation should be encouraged.
                                                               Tests: Hct; others as indicated from H&P

                                     Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                     Premedication             Standard premedication (see p. B-1) is appropriate for nontrauma, neurologically intact
                                                               patients with normal airways.
                                                               Trauma: Trauma patients should be considered to have full stomachs, and sedative pre-
                                                               medications are best avoided. Aspiration prophylaxis with 0.3 M Na citrate (30 mL po), ±
                                                               metoclopramide 10 mg iv ± ranitidine 50 mg iv, should be considered.

===== PAGE 1135 =====
Repair of Facial Fractures       1135

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: The majority of patients presenting for elective procedures are healthy and have normal
                   airways. In the case of facial trauma, however, intubation of the trachea may be impossible. Hence, a tracheostomy
                   under local anesthesia may be lifesaving.

                    Induction               If there is any doubt regarding the ease of intubation, an awake FOL should be performed
                                            (see p. B-6). Nasal intubation is preferred for patients with mandibular and maxillary (Le-
                                            Fort) fractures involving a change in occlusion. Patients with orbital, zygomatic, or nasal
                                            fractures usually are intubated orally. In patients with normal airways, a standard induction
                                            (see p. B-2) is appropriate. Nasal or oral ETTs (RAE), or anode ETTs are commonly used
                                            to minimize intrusion into the surgical field. A nasal or oral ETT may not be appropriate in
                                            some patients (e.g., with midface fractures who also require maxillomandibular fixation).
                                            An alternative to tracheostomy in these patients is submental intubation: following oral
                                            ETT placement using a wire-reinforced tube, the surgeon will tunnel the covered connec-
                                            tor end of the tube (with pilot balloon) through the floor of the mouth to emerge below the
                                            submental area of the mandible where it is reconnected to the ventilator.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3); muscle relaxation usually is required except with facial
                                            nerve monitoring. Controlled ↓ BP may be appropriate. Administration of an a ntiemetic
                                            (e.g., metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv and ondansetron 4–8 mg iv) is beneficial in patients
                                            who have their jaws wired or banded together.

                    Emergence               Patients with difficult airways or with jaws wired together should be extubated when fully awake.
                                            Extubation over a tube changer may be appropriate. A wire cutter (or scissors for elastic bands)
                                            should be at the bedside at all times. Ensure that all throat packing has been removed before
                                            extubation. Thorough oropharyngeal suctioning is essential. NG tube may be used p      ostop, so
                                            consider placement prior to extubation. Some patients with multiple trauma or extensive soft-
                                            tissue swelling may require continued postop intubation and mechanical ventilation.

                    Blood and fluid         Moderate—large blood loss                Blood loss from facial fractures or orthognathic
                       requirements         iv: 16–18 ga × 1–2                       procedures can be extensive. T&C patient so blood
                                            Trauma: NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/h                 is immediately available in OR.
                                            Other: NS/LR @ 2–4 mL/h

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          Invasive monitoring may be required in patients
                                            ± Arterial line                          with intracranial or other trauma, or for controlled
                                                                                     ↓ BP. Muscle relaxants will interfere with facial

                                                                                                                                                        Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                     nerve monitoring.

                                                                                                                                                             Plastic and
                    Control of blood        Surgical hemostasis                      Surgical hemostasis should control most bleeding
                      loss                                                           in these procedures.
                                            Topical vasoconstrictors                 Topical vasoconstrictors, such as phenylephrine or
                                                                                     cocaine, can be applied on the surgical field.
                                            Posterior oropharyngeal packing          Posterior oropharyngeal packing can keep blood
                                                                                     from passing undetected into the upper GI tract.
                                            Controlled ↓ BP                          Controlled ↓ BP often can be achieved simply by
                                                                                     increasing volatile anesthetic levels.

                    Positioning             3 and pad pressure points                Some surgeons prefer that the OR table be rotated
                                            3 eyes                                   90° or 180°. Be prepared with long hoses and appro-
                                                                                     priate connectors. Consider protecting eyes with an
                                                                                     ophthalmic ointment.

                    Complications           ETT damage                               Nasal ETT may be wired inadvertently to the max-
                                                                                     illa, making extubation difficult. In case of ETT dam-
                                                                                     age, be prepared to reestablish the airway rapidly by
                                                                                     reintubation, usually over an intubating stylet.
                                            Oculocardiac reflex ↓↓ HR + ↓ BP         Notify surgeon (stop surgical stimulus). Consider
                                                                                     atropine and increasing depth of anesthesia.

===== PAGE 1136 =====
1136   c h a p t e r 11.3     Craniofacial Surgery

                                          POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications               Airway obstruction                          Wire cutters (or scissors) should be available at
                                                                                                             bedside to facilitate emergent reintubation or other
                                                                                                             form of airway management. Consider retained
                                                                                                             throat pack.
                                                                 PONV                                        Multimodal treatment of nausea is important.

                                     Pain                        Parenteral narcotics (see p. C-3) or        Local anesthetic infiltrated at end of procedure.
                                       management                PCA with antiemetics (see p. C-3).

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. 2nd edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2006.
                                       2. Fischer K, et al: Injuries associated with mandible fractures sustained in motor vehicle collisions. Plast Reconstr Surg 2001;
                                          108(2):328–31.
                                       3. Greenberg AM, Prein J, eds: Craniomaxillofacial Reconstructive and Corrective Bone Surgery. Springer, New York: 2002.
                                       4. Girotto JA: Long-term physical impairment and functional outcomes after complex facial fractures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2001;
                                          108(2):312–27.
                                       5. Hoffmann JF: Naso-orbital-ethmoid complex fracture management. Fac Plast Surg 1998; 14(1):67–76.
                                       6. Kim KF, Doriot R, Morse MA, et al: Alternative to tracheostomy: submental intubation in craniomaxillofacial trauma.
                                          J Craniofac Surg 2005; 16(3):498–500.
                                       7. Lima SM Jr, Aspirno L, Moreira RW, de Moraes M: A retrospective analysis of submental intubation in maxillofacial trauma
                                          patients. J Oral Macillofac Surg 2011; 69(7):2001–5.
                                       8. Mohan R, Iyer R, Thaller S: Airway management in patients with facial trauma. J Craniofac Surg 2009; 20(1):21–3.
                                       9. Perry M, Morris C: Advanced trauma life support (ATLS) and facial trauma: can one size fit all? Part 2: ATLS, maxillofacial
                                          injuries and airway management dilemmas. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2008; 37(4):309–20.
                                      10. Thoren H, Schaller B, Suominen AL, Lindqvist C: Occurrence and severity of concomitant injuries in other areas than the
                                          face in children with mandibular and midfacial fractures. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2012; 70(1):92–6.

                                     LEFORT OSTEOTOMIES
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
          Plastic and

                                     Description: LeFort osteotomies are used to correct maxillary deformities. The most common is the LeFort I,
                                     a transverse osteotomy, above the apices of the teeth, used to correct maxillary retrusion or maxillary vertical
                                     excess or deficiency. One of the goals in achieving improved function is to improve the occlusion, as classified by
                                     Angle (Fig. 11.3-6). One or both jaws may be moved to achieve normocclusion. An intraoral vestibular incision is
                                     used for this approach, followed by an osteotomy of the maxilla, with either a burr or a saw, and completed with
                                     osteotomes. The osteotomy extends through the maxillary sinus toward the ETT, within the piriform aperture.
                                     There is potential for nasal ETT damage with this maneuver. Of note, BP usually will increase at the start of the
                                     osteotomies, increasing bleeding if anesthesia/analgesia is inadequate. The maxilla is subsequently downfractured
                                     (Fig. 11.3-7) and mobilized with Rowe disimpaction forceps. This is when most of the bleeding occurs. Further
                                     interdental osteotomies creating multiple maxillary segments may be required. LeFort II or LeFort III maxillary
                                     osteotomies may be used to correct severe midfacial retrusion. In these cases, infraorbital incisions are used with
                                     either brow or coronal (Fig. 11.3-4) incisions. With maxillary advancements, iliac or cranial bone grafts are often
                                     necessary to close the bony gap created. Most of these patients have orthodontic appliances and will require inter-
                                     maxillary fixation (IMF), with either wire or elastics at the end of the procedure, with or without a prefabricated
                                     splint. The maxilla is fixed rigidly in the new position with miniplates.

===== PAGE 1137 =====
LeFort Osteotomies       1137

                                                          A

                                                          B

                                                          C

                               Figure 11.3-6. The Angle classification of occlusion. A: Class I, normal occlusion.
                               B: Class II, retroocclusion or mandibular deficiency. C: Class III, prognathic occlusion
                               (maxillary deficiency or mandibular excess). The key relationships to be discerned are
                               those of the first molar teeth, cuspids, and incisors. (Reproduced with permission from

                                                                                                                                                      Reconstructive Surgery
                               Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery. 5th edition.
                               Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                   Variant procedure or approaches: Recently, distraction osteogenesis after LeFort osteotomy has been shown                               Plastic and

                   to be effective for correction of severe deformity that would be difficult to correct with single movements and in-
                   ternal fixation. This technique creates new bone as the osteotomized bones are slowly separated. No bone grafts are
                   necessary. Distraction hardware is applied either internally or externally. External devices are stabilized via halo and
                   compression bolts into the skull. IMF is not indicated, as the upper jaw must be free to be distracted in relation to
                   the lower jaw. A second operation may be required for removal of distractor hardware. Absorbable internal devices
                   also are available.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Facial deformities; dentoskeletal dysplasia

===== PAGE 1138 =====
1138   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                                 Figure 11.3-7. Removal of bone around the perpendicular plate of the palatine
                                                 bone. The descending palatine vessels may be ligated. (Reproduced with permission
                                                 from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                                                 Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             LeFort I                                          LeFort II      LeFort III   Distractor

                                      Position               Supine; table may be rotated 90° or 180°          ⇐              ⇐            ⇐
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                      Incision               Intraoral                                         Intraoral      ⇐            ⇐
                                                                                                               and facial ±
          Plastic and

                                                                                                               coronal

                                      Special                Miniplates and screws; burr or saws               ⇐              ⇐            Distractors
                                        instrumentation

                                      Unique                 Jaw frequently closed (wires or elastic); nasal   ⇐              ⇐            No IMF
                                        considerations       RAE or armored tube. *NB: Keep SBP <
                                                             100 mm Hg during osteotomy closure.
                                                             With cranial bone graft harvest, the nasal        ⇐              ⇐            ⇐
                                                             ETT goes opposite to the donor side and is
                                                             repositioned later.

                                      Antibiotics, etc.      Cefazolin 1 g iv; methylprednisolone 125          ⇐              ⇐            ⇐
                                                             mg iv (adults)

                                      Surgical time          3–6 h                                             ⇐              ⇐            ⇐

                                      Closing                *NB: Throat pack removal. NG at end of            ⇐              ⇐            ⇐
                                        considerations       case × 24 h. NSAIDs contraindicated.

                                      EBL                    400–800 mL                                        ⇐              ⇐            ⇐

===== PAGE 1139 =====
LeFort Osteotomies   1139

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                              LeFort I                                         LeFort II            LeFort III        Distractor

                     Postop care              PACU → room                                      ICU × 1 d            ⇐                 ⇐

                     Mortality                Rare                                             ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐

                     Morbidity                Relapse                                          ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Infection                                        ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Bone/tooth loss: Uncommon                        ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Severe intraop bleeding: Uncommon                ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Blindness: Very rare                             ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Temporomandibular joint dysfunction              ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Nasal obstruction                                ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Nasolacrimal obstruction                         ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Oronasal fistulas (multipiece osteotomies,       ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              uncommon)
                                              Poor cosmetic result                             ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                              Sensory nerve dysfunction                        ⇐                    ⇐                 ⇐
                                                                                                                                      Distractor
                                                                                                                                      malfunction

                     Pain score               4                                                5                    5                 5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                15 yr–adulthood, usually < 30 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Up to 5% of population

                     Etiology                 Usually developmental in nature; also cleft lip and palate patients
                                              Rarely syndromic: Apert (1/100,000); Crouzon (1/25,000)

                     Associated               Usually none with developmental cases; sleep apnea; or part of a recognized condition associ-
                       conditions             ated with congenital anomalies (e.g., cleft lip and palate, proptotic eyes, severe mitten-hand
                                              syndactylies)

                                                                                                                                                              Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                   Plastic and
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Mandibular Osteotomies/Genioplasty, p. 1143.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Adke M, Medonca C: Concealed airway complication during LeFort I osteotomy. Anesthesia 2003; 58(3):294–5.
                     2. Bidoli SJ, Dumont L, Mattys M, Mardirosoff C, Damseaux P: A serious anesthetic complication of a Lefort I osteotomy. Eur J
                        Anesthesiol 1999; 16(3):201–3.
                     3. Frost DE: Orthognathic surgical techniques. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                        Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1273–95.
                     4. Lo LJ, Hung KF, Chen YR: Blindness as a complication of LeFort I osteotomy for maxillary distraction. Plast Reconstr Surg
                        2002; 109(2):688–700.
                     5. Mohan R, Iyer R, Thaller S: Airway management in patients with facial trauma. J Craniofac Surg 2009; 20(1):21–3.
                     6. Morris DE, Lo LJ, Margulis A: Pitfalls in orthognathic surgery: avoidance and management of complications. Clin Plast Surg
                        2007; 34(3):e17–29.
                     7. Schendel SA, Mason ME: Adverse outcomes in orthognathic surgery and management of residual problems. Clin Plast Surg
                        1997; 24(3):489–505.
                     8. Zellin G, Rasmusson L, Pålsson J, et al: Evaluation of hemorrhage depressors on blood loss during orthognathic surgery: a
                        retrospective study. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2004; 62(6):662–6.

===== PAGE 1140 =====
1140   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                     MANDIBULAR OSTEOTOMIES/GENIOPLASTY
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Mandibular deformities include either a retruded mandible or a prognathic mandible involving a mal-
                                     occlusion (Class II or III) and may occur in combination with a small chin (microgenia). Surgical correction of the
                                     basic mandibular deformity involves either advancing or retruding the mandible. The most common procedure for
                                     this is the sagittal ramus split osteotomy (Obwegeser; Fig. 11.3-8). The mandible is split with the inferior alveolar
                                     nerve solely within the anterior segment, such that the tooth-bearing anterior segment can slide forward or back-
                                     ward to correct the original deformity. A variety of other techniques of mandibular osteotomies exist, often involving
                                     the ramus area of the mandible, and are performed via an intraoral approach.
                                     In some very large deformities, an external incision (Risdon type) and bone graft placement may be necessary to
                                     complete the mandibular ramus reconstruction. Many patients will be treated for dentoskeletal deformities with a
                                     combination of LeFort movement and sagittal-split osteotomies of the mandible. When the mandible is set back,
                                     mandibular bone is resected and often can be used in combined procedures as bone graft for the LeFort osteotomy.
                                     This avoids cranial bone harvest and, therefore, avoids repositioning the ETT during the procedure for cranial bone
                                     access and avoids donor site morbidity. Occasionally, deformities may be corrected by mandibular body osteotomies.
                                     Rigid fixation of mandibular osteotomies is often accomplished by the use of small miniplates and screws. Fixation
                                     also can be accomplished with elastic traction (rarely, wire fixation) between mandible and maxilla (IMF), placed
                                     either at the time of surgery or several days following, and held in position for 1–2 wk. These procedures may be
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                                   A
          Plastic and

                                                                    B

                                               Figure 11.3-8. A, B: “J” stripper used to remove muscle attachments from medial
                                               aspect of distal segment. Used through the osteotomy split. (Reproduced with
                                               permission from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery.
                                               Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 1141 =====
Mandibular Osteotomies/Genioplasty        1141

                                              A                                        B

                                Figure 11.3-9. An osseous genioplasty (A) can be used to augment the chin, move
                                it posteriorly, alter its vertical position or change the transverse position of the chin.
                                Alloplastic implants (B) can be used to augment the chin anteriorly. These are less
                                effective for vertical augmentation. (Reproduced with permission from Booth PW,
                                Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                                Edinburgh: 1999.)

                   combined with a genioplasty to correct the chin deformity; or, genioplasty may be performed as an isolated proce-
                   dure. The most common type is a horizontal osteotomy of the inferior mandible, with the chin segment repositioned
                   with internal fixation (Fig. 11.3-9A). Augmentation of the chin also is accomplished with alloplastic onlay materials
                   (Fig. 11.3-9B) placed via either the oral route or the extraoral route through a small submental incision. As an isolated
                   procedure, genioplasty is performed most frequently with local anesthesia and sedation.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Distraction osteogenesis is being used more frequently in treating certain
                   acquired and congenital jaw deformities. This involves a partial mandibular osteotomy and placement of a distraction
                   device (Fig. 11.3-10). Depending on the application, this may be an external or internal device. External devices are
                   visible over the skin with percutaneous pins into the bone. Internal devices are placed beneath the oral soft tissues,
                   with a single adjustment pin exposed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Mandibular deformity

                                                                                                                                                         Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                              Plastic and
                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine; table may be rotated 90° or 180°. Nasal RAE tube toward head of bed (sutured through
                                             nasal septum), padded, and secured to forehead; shoulder roll; neck extended

                     Incision                Usually oral but may be external in the submental or posterior mandibular area; preinjection with
                                             local anesthetic with epinephrine

                     Special                 Miniplates and screws; burrs/saws; osteotomes; distractor for distraction osteogenesis; throat
                       instrumentation       pack

                     Unique                  Scleral lubricant and shields needed. Postop, patient may have IMF with inability to open the
                       considerations        mouth. (IMF not used with distractor cases). *NB: Remove throat pack before extubation;
                                             thorough oro- and nasopharyngeal suction.

                     Antibiotics, etc.       Cefazolin 1 g iv; methylprednisolone 125 mg iv (adults)

                     Surgical time           Genioplasty: 0.5–1 h
                                             Mandibular osteotomy: 2–4 h

                     EBL                     Genioplasty: 50 mL
                                             Mandibular osteotomy: 100–200 mL

===== PAGE 1142 =====
1142   c h a p t e r 11.3   Craniofacial Surgery

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                      Postop care            PACU → room. If sleep apnea present, ICU overnight + extubation.

                                      Mortality              Rare

                                      Morbidity              Mandibular relapse: ≤ 30%
                                                             Mental nerve paresthesia: 5–20%
                                                             Lingual nerve injury: 1–16%
                                                             Infection/nonunion: < 1%
                                                             Facial nerve injury: Rare (most reported cases resolve without treatment)
                                                             Aseptic necrosis (buccal plate or genioplasty fragment)
                                                             Worsening TMJ problems
                                                             Adverse cosmetic result

                                      Pain score             4

                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                          12

                                                    A                                              B
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                    C                                              D
          Plastic and

                                                                         E

                                              Figure 11.3-10. Mandibular distraction technique: A: An intraoral incision is
                                              made along the oblique line of the mandibular remnant. B: Sites of the pinholes and
                                              proposed osteotomy (interrupted line). C: Pins have been inserted. D: The osteotomy
                                              is performed. E: Commencement of distraction with the appliance in position. The
                                              arrows designate the movement of the mandibular segments with formation of bony
                                              regenerate in the resulting gap. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley
                                              RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven,
                                              Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1143 =====
Mandibular Osteotomies/Genioplasty         1143

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Infant-adult

                     Male:Female           Unknown

                     Incidence             Unknown

                     Etiology              Developmental (90%); acquired (10%)

                     Associated            Usually none with developmental cases; sleep apnea; congenitally small mandible may be associ-
                       conditions          ated with a large tongue and cleft palate (Pierre Robin syndrome), hemifacial microsomia (which
                                           may be associated with heart, vertebral, and other anomalies), Treacher Collins syndrome, or
                                           Nager’s syndrome (many of the congenital cases may be tracheostomy- and gastrostomy-depen-
                                           dent, with associated TMJ ankylosis).

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: LeFort osteotomies; mandibular osteotomies; genioplasty)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   These surgeries are usually performed on patients with facial disproportion. In general, this patient population is
                   young and healthy; however, many of them will present with challenging airway management problems. In addition,
                   facial disproportion will often accompany congenital anomalies (e.g., Crouzon, Apert, Pierre Robin, or Treacher
                   Collins syndromes). (For discussion of specific syndromes, see Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic
                   Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Limbs, p. 1426).

                    Airway                  As usual, a careful airway evaluation is essential because many of these patients have ab-
                                            normal airway anatomy and may be difficult to mask ventilate or intubate. Visual inspec-
                                            tion often reveals the reasons for the surgery and allows the anesthesiologist to determine
                                            the safest approach to intubation. When a difficult intubation is anticipated, the need for
                                            awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6) should be discussed with the patient.

                    Respiratory             Consider the anesthetic implications of associated congenital syndromes in this patient
                                            population. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA, see p. 263) also may be associated with

                                                                                                                                                     Reconstructive Surgery
                                            patients in need of mandibular surgery.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                                                                                                                                          Plastic and
                    Cardiovascular          As above, consider the implications of possible congenital syndromes. Assess whether pa-
                                            tient is a suitable candidate for the use of controlled ↓ BP, particularly those undergoing
                                            maxillary procedures.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic             Encourage autologous blood donation for maxillary procedures.
                                            Tests: Hct

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Standard premedication (see p. B-1) is usually appropriate.

===== PAGE 1144 =====
1144   c h a p t e r 11.3    Craniofacial Surgery

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                     Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                     Induction                  If there is any doubt regarding the ease of intubation or ability to mask ventilate, an awake
                                                                FOL should be performed (see p. B-6). Nasal intubation is preferred for patients undergo-
                                                                ing elective mandibular or maxillary osteotomies, as well as genioplasty. In patients with
                                                                normal airways, a standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate. Nasal or oral ETTs (RAE),
                                                                or anode ETTs, are commonly used to minimize intrusion into the surgical field.

                                     Maintenance                Standard maintenance (see p. B-3); muscle relaxation is usually required. Administration
                                                                of an antiemetic (e.g., metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv and ondansetron 4 mg iv) is essential
                                                                in patients who have their jaws wired or banded together.

                                     Emergence                  Patients with difficult airways or with their jaws wired (or banded) together should be
                                                                extubated when fully awake. Perform thorough oropharyngeal suctioning. If not placed
                                                                previously, an NG tube should be placed before extubation. A wire cutter (or scissors for
                                                                elastic bands) should be at the bedside at all times. Ensure that all throat packing has been
                                                                removed before extubation.

                                     Blood and fluid            Moderate—large blood loss                 Maxillary osteotomies may be associated with
                                        requirements            IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2                        major blood loss (e.g., 1500–2000 mL). The major-
                                                                NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h                       ity of blood loss occurs when the maxilla is down-
                                                                                                          fractured. Controlled ↓ BP (SBP < 90 mm Hg) may
                                                                                                          be particularly useful during this part of the case,
                                                                                                          and blood should be readily available for this and all
                                                                                                          maxillary procedures.

                                     Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1).           Direct arterial pressure measurements are useful for
                                                                ± Arterial line                           deliberate ↓ BP. Central venous access or a 2nd pe-
                                                                ± CVP line or 2nd iv                      ripheral iv may be useful for vasodilator infusions.

                                     Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                 Eyes should be protected with an ophthalmic oint-
                                                                3 eyes                                    ment and eye shields or possible tarsorrhaphy by
                                                                                                          the surgeons. Some surgeons prefer to have the OR
                                                                                                          table rotated 90° or 180°. Be prepared with circuit-
                                                                                                          extension tubing.

                                     Complications              ETT damage                                ETT may be cut during maxillary osteotomy, neces-
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                                Hemorrhage                                sitating rapid reintubation.
          Plastic and

                                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications              Airway obstruction                        Wire cutters (or scissors) should be available at
                                                                                                          bedside to facilitate emergent reinduction or other
                                                                                                          form of airway management. Consider retained
                                                                                                          throat pack.
                                                                PONV                                      Multimodal treatment of nausea is important.

                                     Pain                       Parenteral narcotics (see p. C-2) or PCA with antiemetics (see p. C-3).
                                       management

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Adke M, Mendonca S: Concealed airway complication during LeFort I osteotomy. Anesthesia 2003; 58(3):294–5.
                                       2. Bidgoli SJ, Dumont L, Mattys M, Mardirosoff C, Damseaux P: A serious anesthetic complication of a LeFort I osteotomy. Eur
                                          J Anesthesiol 1999; 16(3):201–3.
                                       3. Blanco G, Melman E, Cuairn V et al: Fibreoptic nasal intubation in children with anticipated and unanticipated difficult
                                          intubation. Paediatric Anaesthesia 2001; 11(1):49–53.

===== PAGE 1145 =====
Mandibular Osteotomies/Genioplasty             1145

                     4. Degoute CS: Controlled hypotension: a guide to drug choice. Drugs 2007; 67(7):1053–76.
                     5. Denny A, Kalantarian B: Mandibular distraction in neonates: a strategy to avoid tracheostomy. Plast Reconstr Surg 2002;
                        109(3): 896–904.
                     6. Frost DE: Orthognathic surgical techniques. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                        Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1273–95.
                     7. Hunt JA, Hobar PC: Common craniofacial anomalies: the facial dysostoses. Plast Reconstr Surg 2002; 110(7):1714–28.
                     8. Mohan R, Iyer R, Thaller S: Airway management in patients with facial trauma. J Craniofac Surg 2009; 20(1):21–3.
                     9. Morris DE, Lo LJ, Margulis A: Pitfalls in orthognathic surgery: avoidance and management of complications. Clin Plast Surg
                        2007; 34(3):e17–29.
                    10. Richardson D, Pospisil OA: Avoiding surgical complications in orthognathic surgery. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen
                        J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1307–20.
                    11. Schendel SA, Mason ME: Adverse outcomes in orthognathic surgery and management of residual problems. Clin Plast Surg
                        1997; 24(3):489–505.
                    12. Silva AC, O’Ryan F, Poor DB: Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) after orthognathic surgery: a retrospective study
                        and literature review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2006; 64(9):1385–97.

                                                                                                                                                             Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                  Plastic and

===== PAGE 1146 =====
c h a p t e r

                          11.4 Functional
                                           Restoration

                                           surgeons
                                           James Chang, MD
                                           David M. Kahn, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Vanila Singh, MD

===== PAGE 1148 =====
MICROSURGERY-FREE-FLAP RECONSTRUCTION
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     James Chang
                                     Description: Microsurgical reconstruction involves moving tissue from one site of the body to another (see
                                     Fig. 11.4-1, Table 11.4-1). This may be muscle, skin, bone, or any combination of these tissues. An artery and vein that
                                     supply the tissues are connected to an artery and vein at the new recipient site, thereby reestablishing blood flow and
                                     ensuring tissue survival. Once transplanted, the tissue is molded and shaped to replace the missing part. Vascular
                                     anastomoses are performed on vessels as small as 1.5 mm in diameter. Complex reconstructions may require 12 h of
                                     GA with significant blood loss and fluid shifts. Patients with comorbid conditions may need additional medical tests
                                     before surgery to ensure that they are able to withstand this type of operation.
                                     Peripheral, central, and arterial lines should be placed at the start of the case only after consultation with the recon-
                                     structive surgeon. For example, radial forearm flap may be injured by placement of a peripheral iv in the antecubital
                                     fossa or within the body of the flap. The neck is a common site for microvascular anastomoses in head and neck re-
                                     construction. The placement of internal jugular lines should be discussed with the surgeon before surgery. The rectus
                                     muscle flap relies on the deep inferior epigastric vessels for its perfusion. Femoral arterial or venous line placement
                                     may injure these vessels and is, therefore, contraindicated. In bilateral breast reconstruction with free flaps, the iv
                                     lines should be placed in the lower extremities if possible. The reconstructive surgeon will try to operate in conjunc-
                                     tion with the extirpative surgeon to minimize operating time. This often necessitates repositioning the patient as the
                                     case progresses.
                                     Microsurgical reconstructions are often long operations, and large surface areas of the patient are exposed during the
                                     surgery. The patient’s core temperature should be monitored closely with the use of a bladder or esophageal tempera-
                                     ture probe. Body and fluid warmers should be used routinely to maintain the patient’s body temperature. There is no
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                               Figure 11.4-1. Locations of commonly used flaps. (Reproduced with permission
                                               from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Principles and
                                               Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)
                              1148

===== PAGE 1149 =====
Microsurgery-Free-Flap Reconstruction     1149

                    Table 11.4-1. Types of Flaps
                    Reconstruction                 Commonly Used Flaps                     Location                Positioning
                    Head and neck                  Fibula                                  Leg                     Supine
                                                   Radial forearm                          Arm                     Supine
                                                   Scapula                                 Back                    Lateral decubitus
                                                   Iliac crest                             Hip                     Supine
                                                   Anterolateral thigh                     Thigh                   Supine
                                                   Gracilis                                Thigh                   Supine
                    Breast                         TRAM                                    Abdomen                 Supine
                                                   Gluteal                                 Buttocks                Lateral decubitus
                                                   Rubens/iliac crest                      Hip                     Supine
                                                   Tensor fascia lata                      Lateral thigh           Supine
                                                   Latissimus dorsi                        Back                    Lateral decubitus
                    Lower extremity                Rectus abdominis                        Abdomen                 Supine
                                                   Latissimus dorsi                        Back                    Lateral decubitus
                                                   Serratus anterior                       Back                    Lateral decubitus
                                                   Gracilis                                Thigh                   Supine

                   standard practice for anticoagulation in microsurgery. No randomized prospective clinical trial has definitively docu-
                   mented the efficacy of a particular type of anticoagulation in routine reconstructive microsurgery. Aspirin, dextran,
                   and heparin are the most commonly used agents. Close communication between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is
                   critical so that the desired agent is administered at the appropriate time.
                   The survival of the flap relies on the patency of the anastomosis. Thrombosis requires reexploration and may →
                   complete loss of the tissue. If thrombosis is encountered during reexploration, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
                   may sometimes be administered to help reestablish patency. Anastomotic patency is diminished by vasospasm or
                   emergent vascular constriction. The common causes of vasoconstriction include dehydration, hypothermia, pain,
                   and administration of vasoconstrictors; therefore, during microsurgery, vasoconstrictors are contraindicated and
                   should be given only when absolutely necessary, after consultation with the reconstructive surgeon. The patient
                   must be adequately hydrated so that there is good perfusion to the transplanted tissue. Diuretics should be avoided.
                   Postop pain control is important to prevent vasoconstriction on emergence from anesthesia. After surgery, patients
                   are transferred to an area of the hospital where the free flap can be monitored. In many hospitals, this is an ICU.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma, cancer, chronic wounds, congenital anomalies, and burns are some of the com-
                   mon diagnoses that result in the need for microsurgical reconstruction.

                                                                                                                                                      Reconstructive Surgery
                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

                                                                                                                                                           Plastic and
                     Position               Requirements of the recipient site take precedence; optimal position for the donor site is then
                                            considered.

                     Incision               Each site will have specific incision.

                     Special                Microscope; tourniquet for extremities
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Multiple surgical teams; avoid hypothermia; ± anticoagulation; if intraop nerve stimulation is
                       considerations       planned, muscle relaxants should be avoided.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin (1 g iv) in uncomplicated cases; broader coverage in complicated circumstances

                     Surgical time          Simple flap: 4–6 h
                                            Complex cases: 8–12 h

                     Closing                Splints and dressings should be secured before emergence.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Skin flap: 200 mL
                                            Muscle flap: 200–500 mL
                                            Bone flap: 500–1000 mL

===== PAGE 1150 =====
1150   c h a p t e r 11.4   Functional Restoration

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                      Postop care             ICU for flap perfusion monitoring

                                      Mortality               < 2% (usually associated with coexisting disease)

                                      Morbidity               Soft-tissue complications: 20–30%
                                                              Vascular complications requiring reexploration: 5–10%
                                                              Flap failure: 5%

                                      Pain score              3–5

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age range               2–90 yr

                                      Male:Female             1:1

                                      Incidence               50–200/yr/major center

                                      Etiology                Malignancy; trauma; chronic infection

                                      Associated              Complications of underlying disease (e.g., anemia)
                                        conditions

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                          PREOPERATIVE
                                     These surgeries are carried out on patients who have sustained major soft-tissue losses and require flap procedures
                                     to cover the defects. There are four typical patient populations presenting for this surgery: (a) those presenting
                                     for reconstruction following cancer surgery (e.g., radical neck dissection and mastectomy); (b) patients following
                                     trauma, usually with upper or lower limb defects; (c) patients with congenital defects; and (d) previous burn victims.
                                     In general, these patients should present few problems for the anesthesiologist. In a patient with a congenital lesion,
                                     however, it is prudent to look for evidence of CHD, musculoskeletal deformities, and airway problems.

                                     Respiratory               Exposure of the thorax to radiation may produce pathologic changes in the lungs and
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                               related structures, including pneumonitis (→ dyspnea, hypoxemia) that may progress to
                                                               fibrosis (→ ↓ pulmonary compliance). Tracheal or bronchial fibrosis may → partial airway
          Plastic and

                                                               obstruction. Many burn patients have pulmonary pathology 2° smoke inhalation injury.
                                                               The pathology usually includes edema, inflammation, and loss of ciliary activity, but can
                                                               vary depending on the length and amount of smoke exposure, as well as the composition
                                                               of the material that burned. Patients with breast cancer may have been treated with che-
                                                               motherapeutic agents (e.g., methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin) that may cause
                                                               pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial infiltrates, and pleural effusions.
                                                               Tests: Consider CXR, PFT, and pulmonary consult.

                                     Cardiovascular            Exposure of the heart to radiation may produce pathologic changes in the heart and r elated
                                                               structures, including accelerated atherosclerotic changes, myocardial fibrosis, pericarditis,
                                                               and valvular dysfunction. Patients with breast cancer may have been treated with doxo-
                                                               rubicin (Adriamycin), which may produce cardiomyopathy (usually seen at total doses
                                                               > 550 mg/m2) → CHF. XRT increases the incidence of clinically significant cardiomyopathy.

                                     Hematologic               Myelosuppression may be present in patients with Hx of chemotherapy.
                                                               Tests: CBC, with differential and Plt count

                                     Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                     Premedication             Standard premedication (see p. B-1).

===== PAGE 1151 =====
Microsurgery-Free-Flap Reconstruction             1151

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Coordinate iv and/or invasive monitoring sites with the surgical team. Adjunctive
                   regional anesthesia is an option for the appropriate patient who will not be anticoagulated. Some authors propose that
                   the resultant vasodilation causes ↑ blood flow through the flap, but this has not been definitely shown in clinical trials.

                    Induction                   Standard induction (see p. B-2) and intubation. Avoid succinylcholine in burn patients.

                    Maintenance                 Standard maintenance with sevoflurane (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation usually is required.
                                                The patient must be kept warm and well hydrated to minimize peripheral vasoconstriction,
                                                which might impair graft perfusion. Surgeon may request intraop anticoagulation, usually
                                                in the form of aspirin, dextran, or heparin.

                    Emergence                   Smooth emergence to avoid disrupting the surgical repair. Patients usually are transported
                                                to the ICU for continuous monitoring of flap perfusion.

                    Blood and fluid             Moderate blood loss                         Keep patient warm, and maintain a positive fluid
                       requirements             IV: 16 ga × 1                               balance. A Hct of 30–35% will provide adequate O2
                                                NS/LR @ 4–5 mL/kg/h                         transport, while minimizing viscosity. Dextran 40
                                                Warm fluids.                                may be used to further ↓ viscosity, thereby ↑ flap
                                                Humidify gases.                             blood flow.

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                UO
                                                ± Arterial line                             An arterial line may be useful for prolonged pro-
                                                                                            cedures where regular ABGs and blood chemis-
                                                                                            tries will be needed.

                    Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   These can be very lengthy surgeries, and careful
                                                3 eyes                                      monitoring of pressure points is essential.

                    Complications               Hypothermia                                 Maintain normal body temperature with warming
                                                                                            blankets, fluid, and airway warmers.
                                                Decubitus ulcer                             Pressure necrosis can occur in as little as 2 h. Care-
                                                                                            fully pad and repeatedly 3 pressure points.
                                                Dextran reaction                            Prophylactic use of very low molecular weight dex-
                                                                                            tran (Promit) usually prevents allergic reactions
                                                                                            to higher molecular weight dextran. Adult dose =
                                                                                            20 mL 1–15 min before dextran infusion.

                                                                                                                                                                   Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                        Plastic and
                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Arterial thrombosis                         May require reexploration.
                                                Hematoma                                    May require reexploration.

                    Pain                        Parenteral opiates (see p. C-3).            Pain should be treated promptly to minimize re-
                      management                PCA (see p. C-3).                           flex peripheral vasoconstriction and impaired graft
                                                                                            perfusion.
                                                Multimodal approach                         Consider a combination of gabapentin, iv acetamin-
                                                                                            ophen, opiates, and regional nerve block.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Erni D, Banic A, Signer C, et al: Effects of epidural anaesthesia on microcirculatory blood flow in free flaps in patients under
                        general anaesthesia. Eur J Anaesthesiol 1999; 16(10):692–8.
                     2. Evans BC, Evans GR: Microvascular surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 2007; 119(2):18e–30e.
                     3. Gardiner MD, Nanchahal J: Strategies to ensure success of microvascular free tissue transfer. J Plast Reconstr Anesthet Surg
                        2010; 63(9):e665–73.
                     4. Hagau N, Longrois D: Anesthesia for free vascularized tissue transfer. Microsurgery 2009; 29(2):161–7.
                     5. Hallock GG: The complete classification of flaps. Microsurgery 2004; 24(3):157–61.

===== PAGE 1152 =====
1152   c h a p t e r 11.4     Functional Restoration

                                       6. Lee RG, Baskin JZ: Improving outcomes of locoregional flaps: an emphasis on anatomy and basic science. Curr Opin
                                          Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2006; 14(4):260–4.
                                       7. Lipa JE: Breast reconstruction with free flaps from the abdominal donor site: TRAM, DIEAP, and SIEA flaps. Clin Plast Surg
                                          2007; 34(1):105–21.
                                       8. Pattani KM, Byrne P, Boahene K, Richmon J: What makes a good flap go bad? A critical analysis of the literature of
                                          intraoperative factors related to free flap failure. Laryngoscope 2010; 120(4):717–23.
                                       9. Pereira CM, Figueiredo ME, Carvalho R, Catre D, Assunção JP: Anesthesia and surgical microvascular flaps. Reve Bras
                                          Anesthesiol 2012; 62(4):563–79.

                                     MICROSURGERY-REPLANTATION
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Patients who require replantation surgery are trauma victims and must be evaluated carefully preop,
                                     by both surgeons and anesthesiologists, to ensure that replantation is appropriate and that other injuries are not
                                     overlooked. In these cases, time is critical, as the amputated tissue is ischemic and may require immediate revas-
                                     cularization if it is to be salvaged. Coordination between the microsurgeon, anesthesiologist, and trauma team is
                                     important to minimize the time between injury and replantation.
                                     As in any microsurgical procedure, it is critical to prevent vasoconstriction in these procedures. These patients may
                                     have experienced significant blood loss at the time of the trauma and require iv hydration and/or blood transfusion.
                                     The need for hemodynamic support often indicates another injury that may preclude transplantation. The patient may
                                     be hypothermic and require active rewarming. Vasoconstrictors and diuretics should be avoided unless absolutely
                                     necessary. During the replantation procedure, other tissues (e.g., skin, vein, bone) are required to aid in the recon-
                                     struction. These are routinely harvested from the leg, groin, or foot, which will be prepped into the surgical field.
                                     The amputated stump is initially examined using loupe magnification. The arteries, veins, and nerves are dissected
                                     and tagged. The surgeon determines if the part is replantable. The amputated stump is prepared by dissecting the
                                     recipient arteries, veins, and nerves. The need for a vein graft may be determined at this time. The sequence of re-
                                     plantation varies; however, a general algorithm is:
                                     Bone fixation → Extensor tendon repair → Flexor tendon repair → Nerve repair → Arterial and venous anastomoses →
                                     Skin closure
                                     The replanted tissue must be monitored on an hourly basis to ensure continued viability. In many hospitals, this is
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     performed in a microsurgical unit, whereas in others, the ICU is used. Patients should be kept adequately h
                                                                                                                                                ydrated,
                                     warm, and pain-free to prevent vasoconstriction and subsequent thrombosis. Vascular thrombosis requires
          Plastic and

                                     immediate exploration and revision of the vascular anastomosis.
                                     Specific variations of replantation procedures have unique features, as follows.
                                     Replantation of fingers and hands: Generally, two surgeons work simultaneously. One surgeon at the back
                                     table explores the amputated parts, tagging significant nerves, vessels, and tendons. A second surgeon debrides the
                                     amputation sites and identifies the stumps of reparable structures. The surgeons then proceed with replantation.
                                     Generally, bone fixation and tendon repairs are performed first. Vessel and nerve repairs are performed next, using
                                     a microscope. The need for vein grafting and anticoagulation is determined intraop. Blood transfusions are rarely
                                     needed except when using anticoagulants.
                                     Replantation of extremities: Replantation of arms or legs must be handled very efficiently because irreversible
                                     muscle damage occurs within 4 h of ischemia. Generally, the sequence of surgery is similar to finger replantation,
                                     with the exception being that a temporary arterial circulation (using a dialysis shunt) is established as soon as pos-
                                     sible to minimize ischemia time in an amputated part. Ongoing venous blood loss occurs while skeletal repairs are
                                     done, and transfusion is frequently required. Definitive vessel repairs (often requiring vein grafts) and nerve repairs
                                     are done under the microscope.
                                     Scalp replantation: Scalp avulsions are caused by entanglement of hair in machinery. These amputations are fre-
                                     quently replantable, sparing the patient a grotesque and unstable deformity. Initial evaluation should include careful
                                     assessment of the C-spine because the patient transiently hangs by the neck until the scalp separates. Initial blood

===== PAGE 1153 =====
Microsurgery-Replantation         1153

                   loss can be significant and should be replaced preop. Replantation proceeds by identifying matching vessels at the
                   margin of the defect and the avulsed scalp. The superficial temporal vessels are most commonly repaired, and use of
                   vein grafts should be anticipated. Following the first artery repair, brisk bleeding generally occurs at the scalp margin
                   until vein repairs are completed. This blood loss should be anticipated.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Fingers/Hands                   Extremities                          Scalp

                     Position                Supine, injured arm extended    Supine                               Supine or side (depending on
                                                                                                                  vessel position)

                     Incision                Conventional hand exposure      Extension of injury; fascioto-       Preauricular
                                                                             mies may be done.

                     Special                 Microscope; hand table;         Microscope; tourniquet               Microscope; neurosurgical
                       instrumentation       tourniquet                                                           headrest

                     Unique                  Anticoagulation                 ⇐                                    RAE or anode tube; table,
                       considerations                                                                             turned 180°

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv                ⇐                                    ⇐

                     Surgical time           1st finger: 3–4 h; 2 h/subse-   4–8 h                                4h
                                             quent finger
                                             Hand: 4 h

                     Closing                 Splint applied before           Cast or splint applied before        Elevate head as much as
                       considerations        emergence.                      emergence.                           possible.

                     EBL                     100–200 mL                      2–6 U                                2–8 U

                     Postop care             ICU for monitoring              ⇐                                    ⇐

                     Mortality               None                            Rare                                 None

                     Morbidity               Replant failure: 5–15%          Failure: 10–20%                      Vascular occlusion →
                                                                                                                  reexploration

                     Pain score              5–6                             5–6                                  3–5

                                                                                                                                                             Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                  Plastic and
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                         Childhood–old age             ⇐                                Young adult

                     Male:Female                       > 10:1                        ⇐                                1:2

                     Incidence                         250/yr/major center           Rare                             ⇐

                     Etiology                          Trauma                        ⇐                                ⇐

                     Associated conditions             Other injuries                Other injuries, blood loss       C-spine injuries, blood loss

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR REPLANTATION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   In general, there are two patient populations for replantation procedures: (a) isolated limb and scalp injury patients
                   (common) and (b) multiple trauma victims (rare). Most patients are otherwise healthy, and the preop workup is
                   routine.

===== PAGE 1154 =====
1154   c h a p t e r 11.4   Functional Restoration

                                     Gastrointestinal         All of these patients should be considered to have full stomachs and, therefore, are at in-
                                                              creased risk for aspiration pneumonitis. In general, they should receive preop medication
                                                              to reduce stomach volume and acidity (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg iv and ranitidine 50 mg
                                                              iv) 30–60 min before induction, time permitting.

                                     Metabolic                ~50% of trauma victims are intoxicated. Anesthesia-related implications of acute ethanol
                                                              intoxication include: ↓ anesthetic requirements, diuresis, vasodilation, and hypothermia.

                                     Neurologic               Assess for possible head or C-spine injury, particularly in the trauma patient presenting
                                                              with facial or scalp injuries.

                                     Laboratory               As suggested by coexisting disease.

                                     Premedication            Standard premedication (see p. B-1). Full-stomach precautions: Na citrate 0.3 M 30 mL
                                                              immediately before induction of anesthesia.

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                     Anesthetic technique: GETA, after rapid-sequence induction. These procedures are often lengthy, and regional
                                     anesthesia is usually not appropriate as the primary technique but may be considered as an adjunct.

                                     Induction                Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) is mandatory in emergency cases, unless awake in-
                                                              tubation is performed. C-spine fracture patients or those with facial injuries may require
                                                              awake fiberoptic intubation (see p. B-6).

                                     Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) for stable patients.

                                     Emergence                Difficult airway or full-stomach cases require awake extubation.

                                     Blood and fluid          Significant blood loss possible       A 16-ga iv catheter in a nonoperated upper extrem-
                                        requirements          IV: 16 ga × 1–2 (extremity/scalp)     ity should be adequate in hemodynamically stable
                                                              IV: 18 ga × 1 (digit)                 patients. Keep patient warm and hydrated to maxi-
                                                              NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h + 3 ×           mize perfusion to the replanted site. Avoid vaso-
                                                              blood loss                            constrictors if possible.
                                                              Fluid/blood warmers, heating blan-    HCT > 33% may ↑ viscosity + ↓ perfusion
                                                              ket, warmed circuit humidifier

                                     Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).       Invasive hemodynamic monitoring should be con-
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                              ± Arterial line, CVP                  sidered in cases where large blood loss is anticipated.
          Plastic and

                                     Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                                              3 eyes

                                     Control of blood         Tourniquet may be used.                Inflation pressure is typically 100 mm Hg greater than
                                       loss                                                          systolic pressure. Maximum “safe” tourniquet time is
                                                                                                     1.5–2 h, followed by a 5- (preferably) 15-min reperfu-
                                                                                                     sion interval if further tourniquet time is necessary.

                                     Special                  Tourniquet deflation and limb         Mild ↓ BP is common. In patients with moderate-to-
                                       considerations         reperfusion                           severe lung disease, continue controlled v entilation
                                                                                                    until after the lactic acid that has accumulated
                                                                                                    in the ischemic limb is metabolized (3–5 min)
                                                                                                    because these patients may be unable to increase
                                                                                                    ventilation adequately to buffer this acid load.

                                     Complications            Hemodynamic instability               Previously unrecognized injuries (e.g., pneumo-
                                                                                                    thorax, cardiac tamponade, intracranial bleeding)
                                                                                                    should be considered as a cause of unexplained
                                                                                                    intraop hemodynamic instability in all acute trauma
                                                                                                    victims.

===== PAGE 1155 =====
Breast Reconstruction         1155

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Reperfusion failure                        May require immediate reexploration.

                    Pain                       PCA (see p. C-3)                           With continuous infusion of local anesthetic
                      management               Regional nerve block                       will provide excellent analgesia.

                    Tests                      None routinely indicated.                  Reimplant perfusion must be monitored.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Goldner RD, Urbaniak JR: Replantation. In: Green DP, Hotchkiss DP, Hotchkiss RN, et al., eds. Green’s Operative Hand
                        Surgery, 6th edition. Churchill Livingstone, San Francisco: 2010, Chapter 48.
                     2. Ilfeld BM, Enecking FK: Continuous peripheral nerve blocks at home: a review. Anesth Analog 2011; 113(4):904–25.
                     3. Su HH, Lui P-W, Yu CL, Liew CS, et al: The effects of continuous axillary brachial plexus block with ropivacaine infusion on
                        skin temperature and survival of crushed fingers after microsurgical replantation. Chang Gung Med J 2005; 28(8):567–74.
                     4. Wijayaratna SBT, Suraweera HJ, Lamawansa MD, et al: Post-operative critical care and outcomes of limb replantation:
                        experience in a developing country. Injury 2008; 39(2), 203–8.

                   BREAST SURGERY—INTRODUCTION
                   David M. Kahn
                   Patients presenting for plastic surgery of the breast can be grouped into four basic categories along a continuum
                   ranging from amastia/hypomastia to hypertrophy. Plastic surgery procedures are designed to create or make ad-
                   justments in the amounts of skin and glandular tissue or to make adjustments in their relationship to each other to
                   create an aesthetic breast. The first type of patient is one who has acquired amastia after undergoing a mastectomy;
                   it is this patient who is featured in this section on functional restoration. In this patient, the goal is to replace the
                   missing tissue, both skin and glandular, with like tissue or an implant. The second type is a person presenting for
                   augmentation mammoplasty (see p. 1108). In this situation, the breast is deficient of skin and glandular tissue. The
                   third type is the patient who presents for a reduction mammoplasty (see p. 1110). In this situation, there is an excess
                   of glandular tissue and skin. The fourth type is the patient who presents for a mastopexy or breast lift (see p. 1112).
                   In this patient, there exists a discrepancy between the amount of glandular tissue present and the volume of the skin

                                                                                                                                                               Reconstructive Surgery
                   envelope, resulting in ptosis.
                   For all breast procedures, the patient’s breasts are marked preop with the patient in either sitting or standing position.

                                                                                                                                                                    Plastic and
                   This is a necessity, and its importance cannot be overstated. The appearance of the breasts in the supine position
                   versus the upright position is significantly different due to the effects of gravity.

                   BREAST RECONSTRUCTION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The goal of breast reconstruction is to create an aesthetic breast that is symmetrical with the contra-
                   lateral breast. Typically, this can be accomplished in three ways: expander/implant reconstruction; latissimus flap
                   reconstruction, ± an implant; and TRAM flap reconstruction, performed using either a pedicled technique or a free-
                   tissue transfer. If abdominal tissue is not available, autologous breast reconstruction can also be performed using free
                   flaps from other areas such as the gluteal region (superior gluteal artery perforation flap) or medial thigh (transverse
                   upper gracilis flap). Each type of reconstruction follows the principle of replacing glandular and cutaneous breast
                   tissue. In patients undergoing mastectomy, reconstruction may be performed immediately after the mastectomy or
                   it may be delayed and performed at a later date.

===== PAGE 1156 =====
1156   c h a p t e r 11.4     Functional Restoration

                                     In expander/implant reconstruction (Fig. 11.4-2), a tissue expander is placed underneath the pectoralis major muscle
                                     and a portion of the serratus anterior muscle, followed by skin closure. Thus, two layers exist above the implant—skin and
                                     muscle. The patient returns to the office for expansions, with saline being injected into the implant port. This is continued
                                     until the desired size is reached. Then, the patient returns to the OR for the exchange of the expander for a permanent
                                     implant that contains either saline or silicone gel as filler material. Except for the psychosocial aspects of patient man-
                                     agement, much of the technique and perioperative concerns are similar to those for breast augmentation (see p. 1108).
                                     Autologous breast reconstructions: Two types of flaps are used for these procedures—latissimus m            yocutaneous
                                     flap and transverse rectus abdominis muscle (TRAM) flap. The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap consists of the
                                     muscle with overlying skin that is rotated from the back to the anterior chest for the creation of a breast. The flap does
                                     not supply sufficient bulk to be used in breast reconstruction unless the contralateral breast is very small. Usually a
                                     breast implant is placed between the latissimus and pectoralis muscles, thus increasing the volume of the reconstruc-
                                     tion. The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position for the latissimus flap harvest. The incision is designed to
                                     surround the skin paddle. The ellipse of skin is incised, and the dissection then proceeds along the superficial surface
                                     of the latissimus muscle toward its lateral, superior, and inferior borders. Dissection is performed underneath the
                                     latissimus muscle to separate it from the deep tissues of the back. The muscle is released from its insertions on the
                                     posterior superior iliac crest, medial fascial attachments, and surrounding muscle attachments (i.e., serratus anterior,
                                     teres major). The flap is tunneled through the axilla, and the back wound is closed (Fig. 11.4-3). The patient is then
                                     returned to the supine position. The muscle is disinserted from the humerus, if necessary, and brought out onto the
                                     anterior chest wall. At this point, the muscle is inset into the mastectomy defect. An implant or tissue expander may
                                     be placed under the muscle if necessary for size and symmetry. Often, the patient is placed in the seated or semi-
                                     Fowler position for closure. The incisions are closed over a drain, and dressings are applied. The skin flap is moni-
                                     tored postop for signs of flap ischemia and congestion, which may necessitate a return to the OR.
                                     The TRAM flap procedure replaces the breast with an ellipse of abdominal skin and subcutaneous tissue based on
                                     the rectus abdominis muscle (Fig. 11.4-4). There are several variations in the type of abdominal tissue that is trans-
                                     ferred. Traditionally, the TRAM flap consists of the entire rectus muscle and overlying subcutaneous tissue and skin.
                                     Modified techniques minimize the amount of muscle removed to decrease the occurrence of postoperative hernias.
                                     These include muscle-sparing TRAM (MS-TRAM) flaps that take out only a small portion of rectus. Deep inferior
                                     epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flaps involve only the skin and subcutaneous tissue with the perforators dissected
                                     from the rectus muscle. DIEP flaps require more tedious dissection. Superficial inferior epigastric artery (SIEA)
                                     flaps are based off the SIEA and do not involve any dissection within the rectus muscle. In selecting patients for a
                                     TRAM flap reconstruction, the patient must have adequate lower abdominal tissue to make a breast; however, obese
                                     patients, smokers, diabetics, and those with a Hx of prior abdominal surgery may have a higher incidence of com-
                                     plications and flap loss. The benefit of this procedure is that it creates a natural appearing breast from the patient’s
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                                                                           Pectoralis major
                                                                                            (chest) muscle

                                                                                                         Implant

                                                 Uninflated tissue   Fully inflated
                                                    expander       tissue expander

                                               Figure 11.4-2. Expander-implant reconstruction. (Reproduced with permission
                                               from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practices, 3rd edition.
                                               Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1157 =====
Breast Reconstruction       1157

                                  A

                       Latissimus
                                                          B
                       dorsi muscle

                       Skin Island

                                           Tunneled
                                           muscle flap
                                   C

                                               Implant

                                                              Size and location
                                                                of scar varies
                                                                                       Figure 11.4-4. Breast reconstruction using
                                                                                       peclicled TRAM flap. (Reproduced with
                   Figure 11.4-3. A–C: Latissimus dorsi flap reconstruction.           permission from Greenfield, LJ, et al, eds:
                   (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, et al,              Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 2nd
                   eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practices, 3rd edition.     edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)
                   Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2001.)

                   own tissue without an implant. As a bonus, the abdominal donor site is closed as though the patient had undergone
                   abdominoplasty (“tummy tuck”). The myocutaneous perforators that arise from the superior epigastric and inferior
                   epigastric arteries provide blood supply to the flap. This flap can be harvested in either a pedicled fashion, based
                   on the superior epigastric artery, or as a free flap, based on the inferior epigastric artery. The inset of the flap and
                   closure of the donor site are the same in both cases. The basic difference between the two methods of flap transfer is

                                                                                                                                                       Reconstructive Surgery
                   that, in the free TRAM procedure, the flap is removed from the abdomen, brought into the mastectomy wound, and

                                                                                                                                                            Plastic and
                   the operating microscope is used to suture the vascular pedicle of the flap to the recipient vessels, either the thora-
                   codorsal or internal mammary arteries. In the case of the pedicled TRAM flap, the flap is passed through a tunnel,
                   created under the skin, maintaining the blood supply via the superior epigastric artery. The flap is brought out into
                   the mastectomy wound where it is sutured into position.
                   Pedicled TRAM flap: The patient is marked preop in the upright position. The midline and inframammary folds are
                   marked, as is the abdominal ellipse. The arms are placed at 90° abduction. The breasts and abdomen are prepped and
                   draped. A general surgeon performs the mastectomy and, if possible, the TRAM flap harvest is started at the same
                   time. Incising the skin along the superior marking of the abdominal ellipse begins the harvest of the flap. The upper
                   abdominal skin and subcutaneous fat are elevated off the abdominal wall fascia up to the level of the costochondral
                   cartilage, as in an abdominoplasty. The table is then flexed, and the upper skin and subcutaneous tissue are brought
                   to overlap the TRAM flap to ensure that the location of the marked incision at the lower border of the flap will allow
                   for abdominal closure. The patient is returned to the supine position. The skin and subcutaneous tissue of the flap
                   are raised from a lateral to medial direction off the abdominal wall fascia until the lateral border of the rectus muscle
                   is identified. Care is taken to preserve the myocutaneous perforators supplying the flap. The anterior rectus sheath
                   is incised, and the rectus muscle is elevated away from the posterior rectus sheath. The inferior epigastric vascular
                   pedicle is identified and divided, preserving as much length as possible. The portion of the rectus muscle below the
                   flap is transected so that the muscle, along with the overlying ellipse of skin and subcutaneous tissue, can be rotated
                   into the mastectomy site. A tunnel is created under the skin to connect the abdominal wound and mastectomy site.
                   The flap is passed through this tunnel and rotated into position on the chest wall (Fig. 11.4-5).

===== PAGE 1158 =====
1158   c h a p t e r 11.4    Functional Restoration

                                                                                                                            Discard zone

                                                                                   IV                                       Deepithelize zone

                                                                                  II

                                              Inferior
                                              epigastric
                                              vessels                         I

                                                                            III

                                                                                                                            Superior epigastric
                                                                                                                            artery

                                                                                                                            Posterior rectus sheath
                                                                                                                            Arcuate line
                                                                                                                            Inferior rectus remnant

                                               Figure 11.4-5. TRAM flap reconstruction of the breast. A contralateral pedicle
                                               TRAM flap has been elevated and will be tunneled under the skin to be inset at the
                                               mastectomy site. The zone of tissue furthest from the blood supply is discarded. A
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                               portion of the TRAM flap will be deepithelialized and placed under the mastectomy
                                               skin flaps. (Reproduced with permission from Spear SL: Surgery of the Breast: Principles
          Plastic and

                                               and Art. Lippincott-Raven: 1998.)

                                     In flap reconstructions, the harvested tissue receives its blood supply through a single artery and vein. It is important
                                     in these cases to maintain a stable BP that will allow for continued perfusion of the flap tissue. Vasopressors are to
                                     be avoided, as they will constrict the artery and thus restrict the inflow into the flap. Paralytics may be requested
                                     in the case of DIEP flaps to minimize muscular twitching while the surgeon dissects through the rectus to follow
                                     the vascular pedicle. It is preferred, if possible, to maintain a stable BP with volume replacement. Once the flap is in
                                     place at the mastectomy site, the table is again flexed as much as 45–60° for closure. Drains are placed within both
                                     the chest and abdominal wound beds. The flap is trimmed and sutured into position to create symmetry with the
                                     contralateral breast. The abdomen is closed in a fashion similar to an abdominoplasty. Many surgeons prefer that
                                     N2O (which can distend the abdomen) be avoided during the abdominal closure. The surgeon will evaluate the flap to
                                     monitor for signs of ischemia and congestion. This is done both by clinical evaluation (color, temperature, and turgor)
                                     and by Doppler. If inflow or outflow is inadequate for flap survival, blood flow may be supplemented by performing a
                                     microvascular anastomosis between the inferior epigastric pedicle and the thoracodorsal vessels. In some cases, the
                                     surgeon may choose to convert the pedicled flap to a free flap.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of the breast; radiation therapy; cardiovascular surgery; Poland syndrome

===== PAGE 1159 =====
Breast Reconstruction      1159

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                               Tissue Expander/Implant            Latissimus Dorsi Flap                  TRAM Flap

                     Position                  Supine                             Lateral decubitus → supine             Supine

                     Incision                  Breast                             Posterior (supine); lateral (thorax)   Abdominal

                     Unique                    May have to place patient in       ⇐                                      ⇐ + Avoid use of N2O.
                       considerations          sitting position during proce-
                                               dure; SCDs; Foley catheter if
                                               case > 3–4 h.

                     Surgical time             1–2 h                              4 h (+ mastectomy time)                6–8 h (free TRAM) 4 h
                                                                                                                         (pedicled TRAM) (not includ-
                                                                                                                         ing mastectomy time)

                     Closing                   Extensive dressing required        ⇐                                      ⇐ + Flex table for abdomi-
                       considerations                                                                                    nal closure.

                     EBL                       Minimal–100 mL                     200–300 mL                             200–400 mL

                     Postop care               PACU → room                        ⇐                                      ⇐ (free TRAM flap → ICU)

                     Mortality                 Rare                               ⇐                                      ⇐

                     Morbidity                 Capsular contraction: ± 30%        —                                      —
                                               Decreased sensation: 15%           ⇐                                      ⇐
                                               Hematoma: 2.2%                     ⇐                                      ⇐
                                               Fat/skin necrosis: 1.7–1.9%        ⇐                                      ⇐
                                               Nipple areola necrosis: 1.4%       —                                      —
                                                                                  Flap loss: Rare                        ⇐
                                                                                                                         Abdominal hernia: Infrequent

                     Pain score                5                                  5                                      5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 30–70 yr

                     Male:Female               Mostly female

                                                                                                                                                                Reconstructive Surgery
                     Incidence                 Breast reconstruction is performed in 9% of female population

                                                                                                                                                                     Plastic and
                     Etiology                  Cancer; trauma; idiopathic; radiation or postcardiovascular surgery

                     Associated                Breast cancer; cardiovascular disease; S/P chemotherapy; pulmonary disease
                       conditions

                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Breast and Chest Wall Reconstruction, p. 1373.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1.   American Society of Plastic Surgeons’ Website: www.plasticsurgery.org.
                     2.   DellaCroce FJ, Wolfe ET: Breast reconstruction. Surg Clin North Am 2013; 93(2):445–54.
                     3.   Hunt KK, et al: Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery. 9th edition. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2010.
                     4.   Serletti JM, Fosnot JA, Disa JJ, Bucky LP: Breast Reconstruction after breast cancer. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 127:124–35.
                     5.   Zhong T, McCarthy CM, Price AN, Pusic AL: Evidence-based medicine: breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg 2013;
                          132(6):1658–69.

===== PAGE 1160 =====
1160   c h a p t e r 11.4    Functional Restoration

                                     CHEST WALL RECONSTRUCTION
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Chest wall reconstruction is most commonly performed for infections, sternal dehiscence, tumor ex-
                                     tirpation, and radiation injuries. Complications after median sternotomy make up a large number of these cases.
                                     The patients often have comorbidities and are at high risk for anesthetic and surgical complications. The goals of
                                     reconstruction are to provide a stable chest wall for respiration, to eradicate infection, and to obtain a healed wound.
                                     Sternal wound infections and dehiscences: Wound complications after median sternotomy include dehiscence
                                     of the sternum and mediastinitis. In these cases, radical debridement of all devitalized tissue is the cornerstone to a
                                     successful outcome. The initial debridement is, therefore, performed in conjunction with the cardiovascular surgeons.
                                     During this debridement, blood loss may be extensive, requiring transfusion. The resulting dead space around the
                                     heart and great vessels is obliterated, most commonly with pectoralis major or rectus abdominis muscle (TRAM)
                                     flaps. For patients who have failed the initial reconstruction or are not candidates for these flaps, a latissimus dorsi
                                     muscle flap may be used. The omentum can also be used to help obliterate the dead space. Despite radical excision
                                     of the sternum, the respiratory function of these patients remains adequate, and no bony stabilization is required.
                                     Tumor extirpation and radiation injury: Tumor resection or removal of osteoradionecrosis of the chest wall
                                     often involves the full-thickness removal of skin, muscle, and underlying rib cage. The rib cage may be recon-
                                     structed with prosthetic mesh or bone grafts. These structures are then covered with muscle flaps. The pectoralis
                                     major, rectus abdominis, and latissimus dorsi muscles are the muscle flaps most commonly used. After surgery,
                                     the patient’s ventilatory capacity may be diminished by the rib resection, and this should be anticipated preop.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Chest wall infections; tumor; sternal dehiscence; radiation injuries

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                           Pectoralis Flap           Latissimus Flap         Rectus (TRAM) Flap     Omental Flap

                                      Position             Supine                    Lateral decubitus →     Supine; table flexed   Supine
                                                                                     supine

                                      Incision             Chest                     Posterolateral thorax   Abdominal              Abdominal

                                      Antibiotics          Cefazolin 1 g             ⇐                       ⇐                      ⇐

                                      Surgical time        3h                        ⇐                       4–6 h                  3h
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                      Closing              3 flap perfusion.         ⇐                       ⇐                      ⇐
                                        considerations
          Plastic and

                                      EBL                  200–400 mL                ⇐                       300–500 mL             200 mL

                                      Postop care          PACU → room               ⇐                       ⇐                      ⇐

                                      Mortality            Rare                      ⇐                       ⇐                      ⇐

                                      Morbidity            Thrombosis/flap failure   ⇐                       ⇐                      ⇐
                                                           Hematoma                  ⇐                       ⇐                      Diaphragmatic hernia
                                                           Fat/skin necrosis         ⇐                       ⇐                      Bowel obstruction
                                                                                                             Abdominal hernia:      Bowel perforation
                                                                                                             Infrequent

                                      Pain score           4–5                       4–5                     4–5                    4–5

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                      Age range                 30–80 yr

                                      Male:Female               1:1

                                      Incidence                 Uncommon

===== PAGE 1161 =====
Chest Wall Reconstruction          1161

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Etiology              Cancer; trauma; radiation; postcardiovascular surgery

                     Associated            Breast cancer; cardiovascular disease; S/P chemotherapy; pulmonary disease; mediastinitis
                       conditions

                          NESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR BREAST AND
                         A
                         CHEST WALL RECONSTRUCTION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   These surgeries are performed most commonly for reconstruction following cancer surgery, such as radical neck
                   dissection and mastectomy (see Anesthetic Considerations for the primary procedure), as well as complications after
                   median sternotomy. The following considerations focus on patients undergoing reconstruction post-chemotherapy.

                    Respiratory             Pulmonary fibrosis may complicate chemotherapy. Bleomycin (> 200 mg/m2) carries the
                                            greatest risk of pulmonary toxicity (10%), but alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide
                                            and melphalan) may cause a degree of pulmonary toxicity as well. Avoid FiO2 > 30% in
                                            bleomycin patients (to prevent progressive pulmonary fibrosis and edema). Patients pre-
                                            senting with complications from a prior sternotomy may have ↓ respiratory function/re-
                                            serve and will require further work up.
                                            Tests: CXR; ABG and PFTs as indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular          Cardiomyopathy and CHF may result from chemotherapy, especially doxorubicin (Adria-
                                            mycin) > 550 mg/m2. Previous XRT increases risk of clinically significant cardiomyopathy.
                                            Patients with median sternotomy-related complications who have undergone prior cardiac
                                            surgery will require careful evaluation of their current cardiovascular status.
                                            Tests: ECG; ECHO, if indicated from H&P

                    Neurological            Note any previous damage to long thoracic nerves, as evidenced by winged scapula deformity.

                    Musculoskeletal         It is traditional to avoid iv and BP cuff in the upper extremity on mastectomy side.

                    Hematologic             Myelosuppression/toxicity from chemotherapeutic agents may be present.
                                            Tests: CBC; Plt count; coag profile; Hb/Hct

                    Renal/Hepatic           Methotrexate can produce renal and hepatic dysfunction. Elevated alkaline phosphatase

                                                                                                                                                            Reconstructive Surgery
                                            may suggest metastatic bone invasion.

                                                                                                                                                                 Plastic and
                                            Tests: Electrolytes; BUN; Cr; LFTs

                    Gastrointestinal        Tamoxifen, used in hormonal chemotherapy, can cause preop N/V and dehydration.

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P, prior chemotherapy

                    Premedication           Midazolam 1–2 mg iv immediately preop

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2) and intubation. Avoid iv and NIBP monitoring on mastec-
                                            tomy side.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation is usually appropriate. These patients
                                            should be kept warm and well hydrated to minimize peripheral vasoconstriction, which
                                            might impair graft perfusion.

                    Emergence               During some of the procedure and for application of dressing, patient may be moved to sitting
                                            position, with consequent coughing, bucking, etc. (Rx: deeper anesthesia, e.g., propofol 0.5 mg/
                                            kg or lidocaine 1 mg/kg.) Watch BP carefully, and treat orthostatic hypotension if it occurs,
                                            usually with a fluid bolus if the patient is not volume-sensitive (e.g., Hx of CHF or renal failure).

===== PAGE 1162 =====
1162   c h a p t e r 11.4     Functional Restoration

                                     Blood and fluid             IV: 16 ga × 1                               Extensive blood loss may occur with debridement
                                        requirements             NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                         of sternum in cases of infection or dehiscence.
                                                                 Warm fluids.                                Keep patient warm and maintain a positive fluid
                                                                                                             balance.
                                                                 Humidify gases.                             Hypothermia may impair flap perfusion.

                                     Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1).             Use invasive monitoring in cardiovascular-challenged
                                                                 UO                                          patients or in cases with significant expected blood
                                                                                                             loss, where regular ABGs and blood chemistries will
                                                                                                             be useful.

                                     Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                                 3 eyes

                                     Complications               Pneumothorax                                Pneumothorax should be considered with any
                                                                                                             ↑ lung inflation pressure, ↓ O2 sat, or ↓ BP.
                                                                 Decubitus ulcer                             Pressure necrosis can occur in as little as 2 h. Care-
                                                                                                             fully pad and repeatedly 3 pressure points.
                                                                 Dextran reaction                            Prophylactic use of very low molecular weight dex-
                                                                                                             tran (Promit) usually prevents allergic reactions to
                                                                                                             higher molecular weight dextrans. Adult dose = 20
                                                                                                             mL (pediatric dose = 0.3 mL/kg) iv 1–2 min (maxi-
                                                                                                             mum 15 min) before dextran infusion.

                                          POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications               Pneumothorax
                                                                 ↓ Flap perfusion

                                     Pain                        Parenteral opiates (see p. C-2).            Pain should be treated promptly to minimize re-
                                       management                PCA (see p. C-3).                           flex peripheral vasoconstriction and impaired graft
                                                                                                             perfusion.
                                                                 Regional nerve blocks                       Paravertebral and TAP blocks are effective for pain
                                                                                                             control
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     Suggested Readings
          Plastic and

                                       1. Hivelin M, Wyniecki A, Plaud B, et al: Ultrasound-guided bilateral transversus abdominis plane block for postoperative
                                          analgesia after breast reconstruction by DIEP flap. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 128(1):44–55.
                                       2. Kitowski NJ, Lansercasper J, Gendrum JD, et al: Local and paravertebral block anesthesia for outpatient elective breast cancer
                                          surgery. Arch Surg 2010; 145(6):592–4.
                                       3. Petit JY, Rietjens M, Lohsiriwat V, et al: Update on breast reconstruction techniques and indications. World J Surg 2012;
                                          36(7):1486–97.

                                     PRESSURE SORE RECONSTRUCTION
                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Pressure sores occur when constant pressure is placed on an area of the body. They tend to occur
                                     in debilitated, bedridden, paralyzed, and wheelchair-bound patients. Multiple factors—including altered sensory
                                     perception, poor nutrition, incontinence, moisture, and shear forces—also may contribute to the formation of the

===== PAGE 1163 =====
pressure Sore reconstruction         1163

                               Figure 11.4-6. Commonly used flap designs for coverage of sacral and ischial pressure
                               sores. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM: Grabb
                               and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

                                                                                                                                                        Reconstructive Surgery
                   pressure sores. The most common locations are the sacrum, ischium, and greater trochanter regions, as well as the

                                                                                                                                                             Plastic and
                   heel and scalp.
                   The management of pressure sores is multidisciplinary and involves more than just debridement and wound closure.
                   Patient compliance is the most important factor of wound management, as recurrence rates after closure are high.
                   All components that contributed to the formation of the ulcer must be addressed before wound closure. This is best
                   done in a team setting, with the goal of preventing further sores. In this effort, nutrition must be optimized; infec-
                   tion, muscle spasm, and contractures controlled; pressure relief measures instituted; and the psychological issues
                   addressed. Once these are in place, wound reconstruction may begin.
                   Reconstruction is based on adequate debridement, elimination of dead space and pressure points, and closure of the
                   wound with healthy, durable tissue. Multiple flap designs have been described for the coverage of pressure sores, de-
                   pending on their location (Fig. 11.4-6). An important point in the design of a flap is the consideration for future recon-
                   structions because of the high incidence of recurrent wounds. The choice of flap also needs to take into consideration
                   the donor site morbidity. Skin-only flaps, fasciocutaneous flaps, and musculocutaneous flaps are commonly used.
                   The patient is placed in the prone position and may be jackknifed to facilitate exposure of the wound. Debridement of
                   the wound is performed; and the bursa and underlying bony prominences may be removed. Hemostasis is obtained,
                   and the wound is irrigated with pulsed lavage. The flap to be used is designed over the vascular pedicle. The donor site
                   for sacral, gluteal, and greater trochanteric wounds are typically the tissues of the buttocks and posterior thigh. The
                   skin is incised and the flap is raised to include the appropriate layers of tissue, depending on whether a skin, fascio-
                   cutaneous, or musculocutaneous flap is to be used. The flap is then rotated into position in the wound. A portion of

===== PAGE 1164 =====
1164   c h a p t e r 11.4    Functional Restoration

                                     the flap may be deepithelialized and placed into the wound to eliminate dead space. Drains are placed into the wound,
                                     and the flap is sutured into its new location. The donor site defect that occurs after rotation of the flap may be closed
                                     directly or may require a skin graft. Once the operation is complete, the patient is transferred to a pressure-relief bed
                                     (e.g., Clinitron or air-fluidized bed) and extubated.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Pressure sores

                                      ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                      Position                 Prone or lateral decubitus

                                      Incision                 Gluteal or posterior thigh

                                      Unique                   Foley catheter; SCDs
                                        considerations

                                      Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv. Some surgeons may prefer broader polymicrobial coverage.

                                      Surgical time            3h

                                      Closing                  None
                                        considerations

                                      EBL                      200–300 mL

                                      Postop care              Strict bed rest on a pressure-relief bed for up to 3 wk. Care must be taken to ensure that the
                                                               patient is turned every 2 h so that excessive pressure is not transferred to a new location.
                                                               Antibiotics and the control of urine and stool are important to prevent soiling of the suture
                                                               lines.

                                      Mortality                0–1%

                                      Morbidity                Infection: 2–3%
                                                               Dehiscence: 1%
                                                               DVT: 1%
                                                               Recurrence

                                      Pain score               4–6 (depends on spinal cord status)

                                      ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                      Age range                20–70 yr
          Plastic and

                                      Male:Female              Predominantly male

                                      Etiology                 Immobility; unrelieved pressure; altered sensation

                                      Associated               Paraplegia; debilitation; quadriplegia
                                        conditions

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                          PREOPERATIVE
                                     Typically, these surgeries are carried out on nonambulatory patients, with the spinal cord injury patient comprising
                                     a large subset. Anesthesia for plegic patients may well present several challenges, as discussed below.

                                     Respiratory               Plegic patients may have intercostal muscle weakness → atelectasis and ↓ clearance of
                                                               secretions → recurrent URIs and V/Q mismatching → hypoxemia.
                                                               Tests: PFT; ABG; others as indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 1165 =====
pressure Sore reconstruction         1165

                    Cardiovascular           Autonomic hyperreflexia (AH) may present as acute episodes of uninhibited hyperactivity
                                             in the patient with an injury level of T10 or above. The main clinical signs are paroxysmal
                                             HTN and bradycardia, in response to stimulation below the lesion. Severe HTN can result
                                             in pulmonary edema, myocardial ischemia, and cerebral hemorrhage. Identify triggering
                                             stimuli (e.g., bowel or bladder distension, cutaneous stimulation). T4 or higher lesions may
                                             → ↓ BP on induction of GA or regional anesthesia, initiation of IPPV, or postural changes.
                                             Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                    Neurological             3 level of cord injury. AH in patient with spinal cord injury (see Cardiovascular, above)
                                             may manifest as headaches, sweating, facial flushing, or syncope. Hyperreflexia below in-
                                             jury level.

                    Musculoskeletal          Immobility → skeletal muscle atrophy, osteoporosis, and decubitus ulcer formation.

                    Gastrointestinal         Spinal cord injury → ↓ GI function → constipation/full stomach.

                    Renal                    Chronic spinal cord injury → recurrent UTIs and calculi → renal failure. Foley catheter
                                             placement may → AH.
                                             Tests: UA; BUN; Cr; others as indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory               Immobility → ↑ Ca++, → dysrhythmias and nausea.
                                             Tests: Others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Standard premedication (see p. B-1) is usually appropriate. Patients with limited respira-
                                             tory reserve should receive minimal sedation. Nifedipine (10 mg sublingually 5 min or po
                                             20 min before induction) may be used to blunt AH.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. If flap donor and recipient sites are confined to the lower half of the body, regional
                   anesthesia may be considered for short procedures. Spinal or epidural anesthesia will minimize AH; however, an-
                   esthetic level may be difficult to assess, and regional anesthesia may not be tolerated for prolonged surgery. Lighter
                   levels of GA will not prevent AH.

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) and intubation. Although the risk of ↑ K+ 2° succinylcholine
                                             is reportedly decreased 6 mo after injury, NMRs are still preferred. AH may occur with
                                             Foley catheter placement.

                                                                                                                                                       Reconstructive Surgery
                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation is usually appropriate and may be nec-

                                                                                                                                                            Plastic and
                                             essary to reduce muscle spasticity. Avoid drugs that are primarily renally excreted in patients
                                             with CRI. Direct arterial vasodilators and alpha-adrenergic blocking agents should be readily
                                             available. Plegic patients are prone to hypothermia. These patients should be kept warm and
                                             well hydrated to minimize peripheral vasoconstriction, which might impair graft perfusion.

                    Emergence                AH 2° distended bladder or rectum may occur on emergence from anesthesia.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 16 ga × 1                           Keep patient warm and maintain a positive fluid
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                     balance. Hypothermia may impair flap perfusion.
                                             Warm fluids.                            Initial debridement of ulcer may be extensive and
                                             Humidify gases.                         significant blood loss can occur. T&C as appropriate.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                             UO
                                             ± Arterial line                         An arterial line may be useful in patients susceptible
                                                                                     to AH and for prolonged procedures where regular
                                                                                     ABGs and blood chemistries will be useful.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points               Many of these patients may be osteoporotic, so great
                                             3 eyes                                  care should be used in moving and positioning.

===== PAGE 1166 =====
1166   c h a p t e r 11.4    Functional Restoration

                                     Complications              Hypothermia                               Patients with spinal cord injury often have impaired
                                                                                                          thermoregulation. Maintain normal body temperature
                                                                                                          with warming blankets, fluid, and airway warmers.
                                                                AH                                        AH should be promptly controlled with SNP bolus
                                                                                                          (5–50 mcg) and infusion, while anesthesia is deep-
                                                                                                          ened. A continuous trimethaphan infusion (0.5–4
                                                                                                          mg/min) is another option.
                                                                Decubitus ulcer                           Pressure necrosis can occur in as little as 2 h. Care-
                                                                                                          fully pad and repeatedly 3 pressure points.

                                            POSTOPERATIVE

                                     Complications              Respiratory Insufficiency                 Quadriplegic patients may have ↓ VC and ↓ ERV
                                                                                                          and be uniquely susceptible to residual respiratory
                                                                                                          depressant effects.
                                                                AH                                        AH may occur 2° distended bladder or rectum. Rx:
                                                                                                          phentolamine 1 mg iv q 1 min and/or SNP bolus/
                                                                                                          infusion; removal of stimulus.

                                     Pain                       Parenteral opiates (see p. C-2).          Pain should be treated promptly to minimize re-
                                       management               PCA (see p. C-3).                         flex peripheral vasoconstriction and impaired graft
                                                                                                          perfusion.
                                                                Regional nerve block                      Useful for pain control in extremities.

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Bass MJ, Phillips LG: Pressure sores. Curr Probl Surg 2007; 44(2):101–43.
                                       2. Bauer J, Phillips LG: MOC-PSSM CME article: pressure sores. Plast Reconstr Surg 2008; 121(1 Suppl):1–10.
                                       3. Levi B, Rees R: Diagnosis and management of pressure ulcers. Clin Plast Surg 2007; 34(4):735–48.
                                       4. O’Neill DK, Tsui SM, Ayello EA, et al: Anesthesia protocol for heel pressure ulcer debridement. Adv Skin Wound Care 2012;
                                          25(5):209–19.
                                       5. Tchanque-Fossuo CN, Kuzon WM Jr: An evidence-based approach to pressure sores. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 127(2):932–9.
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

===== PAGE 1167 =====
c h a p t e r

                          11.5 Burn Surgery

                                           surgeon
                                           Kenneth K. Yim, MD, FACS

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Melissa T. Berhow, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 1168 =====
FREE SKIN GRAFT FOR BURN WOUND (WITH TANGENTIAL
                                     EXCISION, EXCISION TO FASCIA, OR DEBRIDEMENT)

                                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Description: Until the mid-1970s, management of burn wounds involved daily debridement, hydrotherapy, and
                                     spontaneous eschar separation, with subsequent skin grafts applied to the granulated tissue. Operative management
                                     has become much more aggressive with the description of tangential excision by Janzekovic. In burn patients with-
                                     out inhalation injury, early excision and grafting (days 1–5) can reduce mortality and length of hospital stay. There
                                     are two surgical approaches to burn wounds—tangential excision and fascial excision.
                                     Tangential excision (TE) is the more frequently performed procedure. The concept of TE is extremely simple, but
                                     requires considerable experience and teamwork. Thin slices of burn eschar (burned, necrotic tissue) are shaved sequen-
                                     tially with manual or power dermatomes until a healthy wound bed is developed. Assessment of the wound bed is done
                                     with visualization of bleeding and/or the clinical appearance of the excised bed. Blood loss is generally diffuse and can be
                                     massive; therefore, communication between anesthesiologist and surgeon is essential. In large excision, PRBCs should
                                     be available in the OR before excision so that the anesthesiologist does not get behind in blood and fluid replacement.
                                     Diffuse bleeding, especially dermal, is controlled by laparotomy pads soaked with warm 1:100,000 epinephrine solu-
                                     tion. These pads are replaced every 3–5 min and, after ~10 min, are removed one at a time, with persistent bleeding
                                     points controlled by electrocautery. Although very high plasma epinephrine levels have been reported after major
                                     burn excision, systemic manifestations are very rare in acute burn patients (probably 2° chronic high-level endog-
                                     enous catecholamine secretion).
                                     TE in the extremities usually is accomplished with a pneumatic tourniquet to minimize blood loss. In some centers,
                                     subcutaneous injection of a diluted (1:1,000,000) epinephrine solution under the burn wound also is used to mini-
                                     mize blood loss; however, the resulting vasoconstriction makes the end point of excision—i.e., bleeding—difficult to
                                     ascertain.
                                     Fascial excision involves removing the burn eschar and all underlying fat en bloc to the level of muscle fascia or
                                     beyond. Fascial excision can be performed more rapidly and with less blood loss than TE. Its disadvantages, however,
                                     are the marked cosmetic deformities and functional limitations that occur because of the loss of all soft tissue overly-
                                     ing the musculature. Because of its disadvantages, fascial excision is reserved for 4th-degree burns or for patients
                                     with very extensive, life-threatening, full-thickness (3rd-degree) burns.
                                     In patients with serious burns (> 40% total body surface area [TBSA]), excision usually commences on postop days
                                     2–5, after completion of fluid resuscitation, and is performed every 2–3 d, as the patient’s condition permits. If eschar
                                     excision can be completed before secondary sepsis supervenes, management of the patient is easier and the compli-
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                     cations and morbidity are lessened considerably.
          Plastic and

                                     The end points for surgical excision in large burns are (a) operative time of 2–3 h; (b) core temperature of 35°C; or
                                     (c) blood loss of 10 U of PRBC. The violation of any of these parameters invites coagulopathy and increasing prob-
                                     lems with hemostasis and VS stability. Adverse effects occurring after 3–4 h of operative time are usually the result
                                     of massive transfusion or hypothermia.
                                     Due to loss of skin integrity and large exposed surfaces, these patients lose heat rapidly. Fluids, gases, and the OR
                                     should be warm, although there is no demonstrable benefit to warming the OR past the point of isothermic neutrality
                                     (~82°F [28°C]). Many surgeons, however, will maintain the room at ~ 100°F (38°C). All areas not in the operative
                                     field should be covered, and a warming blanket (Bair Hugger) is used frequently.
                                     Coverage: After excision of wounds and attainment of hemostasis, wounds are covered, using either an autograft
                                     or temporary coverage with an allograft, xenograft, or synthetic/biologic dressing. An autograft is used for coverage
                                     when the wound bed is deemed suitable, a donor site is available, and the patient is stable. A split-thickness skin graft
                                     (STSG) often is used for coverage of a burn wound. Because an STSG is harvested at the dermal level, bleeding also
                                     is controlled with topical epinephrine-soaked laparotomy pads before application of dressings. Depending on the
                                     location of donor sites, many surgeons use subcutaneous infiltration of diluted (1:1,000,000) epinephrine in saline
                                     solution to smooth out irregularities (e.g., underlying ribs) or to create a flat surface (e.g., scalp) to physically improve
                                     the ease of taking skin grafts. A substantial volume of saline may be infiltrated, and this should be added into the total
                                     fluids administered to the patient.

                              1168

===== PAGE 1169 =====
Free Skin Graft for Burn Wound (with Tangential Excision, Excision to Fascia, or Debridement)        1169

                   Intraop position change may be necessary between the burn excision and the STSG harvest. For example, donor skin
                   may be harvested from the back for application to the chest or abdomen.
                   The STSG is held temporarily in place with staples or sutures. Uncontrolled patient movement may dislodge the
                   graft. To protect against this eventuality, grafts are secured with circumferential dressings and splints. This proce-
                   dure may be time consuming, and any uncontrolled patient movement should be avoided.
                   It has become apparent that early eschar excision is advantageous even if wounds are so extensive they cannot be cov-
                   ered with autografts. In this situation, temporary coverage of the excised wound is accomplished with the application
                   of an allograft, porcine xenograft, or synthetic/biologic dressing. The wound is maintained in this way, with further
                   debridement and biologic dressing changes as necessary, until autograft becomes available.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Thermal, electrical, or chemical burn

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                       TE                                                               Fascial Excision

                     Position                          Supine, prone, or lateral                                        ⇐

                     Incision                          Anywhere eschar is to be excised.                                ⇐

                     Special instrumentation           Dermatomes, as determined by the surgeon—manual or               —
                                                       powered.

                     Temperature considerations        Keep room T at ~82°F (28°C).                                     ⇐

                     Unique considerations             Possible subcutaneous infiltration of diluted lidocaine-        None
                                                       epinephrine-saline solution.

                     Antibiotics                       Cefazolin (adult = 1 g; child = 15 mg/kg) iv on induction of     ⇐
                                                       anesthesia

                     Surgical time                     2–3 h                                                            ⇐

                     EBL                               Massive; limit to 10 U PRBC transfusion                          250–500 mL

                     Postop care                       Generally, patients can be extubated at the end of these         ⇐
                                                       procedures, recovered in the PACU, and returned to the
                                                       burn center. If patient remains intubated, generally he/she
                                                       is transported directly to the burn center, where body T can
                                                       be maintained more easily.

                     Mortality                         18–40% (Mortality is a function of burn size, plus other asso-   ⇐

                                                                                                                                                    Reconstructive Surgery
                                                       ciated conditions, especially inhalation injury [Figs. 11.5-1,
                                                       11.5-2])

                                                                                                                                                         Plastic and
                     Morbidity                         Massive blood loss                                               —
                                                       Sepsis                                                           ⇐
                                                       Infection 2° to catheters and lines                              ⇐

                     Pain score                        2–5 (Most patients are maintained on sustained-release           ⇐
                                                       methadone or iv morphine, for periop pain control.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                All

                     Male:Female              More commonly male

                     Incidence                45,000 burn center admissions/yr

                     Etiology                 Scald; flame burns; chemicals; electric burns

                     Associated               Generally few, except in elderly patients
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1170 =====
1170   c h a p t e r 11.5                                  Burn Surgery

                                                                                                              Mortality rate for BAUX score categories by gender
                                                                           100%
                                                                                      Female

                                        Percentage of patients that died   80%
                                                                                      Male

                                                                           60%

                                                                           40%

                                                                           20%

                                                                                  .1−9.9 10−    20−    30−     40−    50−    60−    70−    80−    90− 100− 110− 120− 130− 140
                                                                                         19.9   29.9   39.9    49.9   59.9   69.9   79.9   89.9   99.9 109.9 119.9 129.9 139.9 +
                                                                                                                      BAUX Score (Age + TBSA)
                                                                                                         Total N = 169,915 (Excluding 13,121 Unknown/Missing)

                                                                             Figure 11.5-1. This figure demonstrates the relationship between death, increasing
                                                                             age, and burn size. The proportion of patients who died (case fatality) is plotted as
                                                                             a function of the sum of age and the total percentage of BSA burned, the so-called
                                                                             BAUX Score. There is a strong association between BAUX score and case fatality for
                                                                             both men and women. Overall, women had a higher case fatality than men (4.20% vs
                                                                             3.48%, P < 0.01). The sum of age and burn size (BAUX score) associated with a case
                                                                             fatality of 50% (P 50) was 108. There was no significant difference between genders.
                                                                             A report from the American Burn Association, 2012.
     Reconstructive Surgery
          Plastic and

                                                                             Figure 11.5-2. Probability of survival for patients with and without inhalation injury.
                                                                             (Reproduced with permission from Saffle JR, Davis B, Williams P, et al: Recent outcomes
                                                                             in the treatment of burn injury in the United States: a report from the American Burn
                                                                             Association Patient Registry. J Burn Care Rehab 1995; 16:219–32.)

===== PAGE 1171 =====
Free Skin Graft for Burn Wound (with Tangential Excision, Excision to Fascia, or Debridement)            1171

                    Table 11.5-1. Burn wounds—Classified According to Depth of Burn
                    Degree                                   Burn Depth                              Tissue Involved
                    1st degree                               Superficial                             Epidermis only
                    2nd degree                               Partial thickness                       Various thickness of dermis
                    3rd degree                               Full thickness                          Entire thickness of dermis
                    4th degree                               To underlying tissue                    Beyond dermis (e.g., subcutaneous fat,
                                                                                                     fascia, or muscle)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Burn injuries may result in a broad spectrum of physiologic impairments. These vary, depending on the percent of
                   TBSA burned, location of burns, age of the patient, time elapsed since initial injury, and interim treatment. In the first
                   hours following burn injury, patients may be affected by both carbon monoxide (CO) and cyanide (CN) toxicities.
                   CO impairs O2 transport, O2 release at the tissue level, and mitochondrial function → tissue hypoxia + metabolic
                   acidosis. Pulse oximetry measurement will be falsely high in the presence of CO. CN toxicity is usually the result of
                   inhaled combustion products that include cyanide and hydrocyanic acid → metabolic acidosis, ↓ BP, and dysrhyth-
                   mias. Ideally, burn patients are fluid-resuscitated and stabilized before being brought to the OR. Typically, skin grafts
                   to cover the burn area start on postinjury day 3. Blood loss and hypothermia are the predominant considerations
                   during surgery on burn patients. Blood loss can be rapid and massive, as much as 8 U in 15 min, and can be difficult
                   to estimate as it generally is not collected into the suction.

                    Respiratory                Upper airway: A patient with burns around the airway (e.g., singed nose hairs) should be
                                               intubated as early as possible. Direct inhalational/thermal injury and fluid resuscitation
                                               may make delayed intubation more difficult 2° upper airway edema.
                                               Lower airway: Physiologic derangements may include pulmonary edema and ARDS. In
                                               addition, burn patients can be severely hypermetabolic (e.g., a patient with 40% TBSA
                                               burns may have twice the normal metabolic rate) with corresponding increased CO2 pro-
                                               duction. These patients may have high PIPs and high minute-ventilation requirements.
                                               Pressure control ventilation and high levels of PEEP may be useful. Other possible effects
                                               of severe burns include: ↓ lung and chest wall compliance, ↓ FRC, ↑ A-a gradient, pneu-
                                               monia, and pulmonary embolism.
                                               Tests: ABG, depending on pulmonary status; CXR, PRT

                    Cardiovascular             24–48 h post-burn injury the hypermetabolism associated with burns increases cardiac

                                                                                                                                                        Reconstructive Surgery
                                               demand, and burn patients have greatly elevated circulating levels of catecholamines
                                               → ↑↑ HR + ↑ CO.

                                                                                                                                                             Plastic and
                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Neurological               Evaluate for burn encephalopathy. Characterize baseline mental status before anesthesia to
                                               allow evaluation of recovery postop.

                    Musculoskeletal            Damaged muscle → ↑ acetylcholine receptor density, resulting in ↓ sensitivity to nonde-
                                               polarizing muscle relaxants and potentially fatal elevations of K+ in response to succinyl-
                                               choline. In burns > 5% TBSA, avoid succinylcholine after 24 h postburn and for at least 1 yr
                                               thereafter for burns > 10% TBSA (↑↑ K+). Recovery of normal response to muscle relaxants
                                               does not occur until burns have healed completely.

                    Hematologic                Coagulopathies may result directly from the burn injury, as well as from rapid replacement
                                               of blood loss during operative procedures.
                                               Tests: Hb/Hct; electrolytes; coagulation profile

                    IV access                  May be difficult; assess preop. Consider central line placement with a large-bore catheter,
                                               such as a Cordis®.

                    Laboratory                 Other tests as indicated from H&P. For recent injury, blood COHb should be measured.

===== PAGE 1172 =====
1172   c h a p t e r 11.5   Burn Surgery

                                     Premedication            Patients are commonly placed on high-dose narcotics after the initial injury; additional
                                                              narcotics are frequently required to provide adequate analgesia for transport and move-
                                                              ment to the OR table.

                                     Transport                For patients with severe ARDS, transportation from burn unit to OR may pose formidable
                                                              challenges with regard to ventilation. Cardiopulmonary monitoring must be continued
                                                              during transport; the ventilation system used in transport must be capable of delivering
                                                              high minute-volumes, PEEP, and inspiratory pressures. These requirements may not be
                                                              satisfied by standard bag-valve systems and may require a high-quality transport ventilator.

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                     Anesthetic technique: GETA. Regional techniques are rarely feasible, given the multiple surgical sites for harvest-
                                     ing and grafting. Some surgeons will employ tumescent infiltration of the burn and donor sites using a large volume
                                     of lidocaine-epinephrine-saline solution to facilitate debridement and graft harvest (↓ blood loss + ↓ postop pain).
                                     LMAs are not recommended, given the potential for significant fluid resuscitation and subsequent airway edema, as
                                     well as the frequent repositioning of patient intraop.

                                     Induction                 If the patient is adequately volume-resuscitated, propofol (1.5–2.5 mg/kg iv) may be used.
                                                               If the patient is intravascularly volume-depleted, etomidate (0.3 mg/kg) or ketamine (1–3
                                                               mg/kg) is recommended. Patients with extensive burns (> 30% TBSA) will develop a de-
                                                               creased sensitivity to nondepolarizing NMBs; therefore, 1.5 × the usual intubating dose
                                                               of NMB is recommended: vecuronium (1.5 mg/kg) or rocuronium (1.5 mg/kg). If rapid-
                                                               sequence induction is indicated, succinylcholine should not be used if the initial injury is >
                                                               24 h old. Under these circumstances, high-dose rocuronium (2 mg/kg) can be used. If the
                                                               face is burned, awake FOI may be necessary and securing the ETT may be difficult. Alter-
                                                               natives to taping the ETT include suturing the tube to the teeth or using umbilical tape.

                                     Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Physiologic derangements of the respiratory system
                                                               (ARDS, pulmonary edema) and a hypermetabolic state may require minute-volumes > 30
                                                               L/min, and high inspiratory pressures and PEEP for adequate ventilation. Depending on
                                                               the anesthesia machine, an ICU ventilator (capable of high-frequency oscillatory ventila-
                                                               tion) may be necessary. Intraop, surgeons may use epinephrine-soaked sponges to ↓ blood
                                                               loss. Systemic absorption of epinephrine will cause tachycardia and increase the probabil-
                                                               ity of dysrhythmias; therefore, it is best to avoid halothane or desflurane. Isoflurane and
                                                               sevoflurane are acceptable.

                                     Emergence                 Estimation of an adequate dose of narcotic to provide postop analgesia may be difficult
     Reconstructive Surgery

                                                               because these patients are often receiving high doses of narcotics preop. Ketamine has
                                                               been used with success in providing improved analgesia in the setting of escalating opioid
          Plastic and

                                                               doses. If large-volume resuscitation has occurred intraop, there is the possibility of clini-
                                                               cally significant airway edema; use caution before extubating to ensure a patent airway.

                                     Blood and fluid           Extensive blood loss                    Blood must be in OR before induction. The major
                                        requirements           IV: 14–16 ga × 2 or a Cordis®           blood loss generally is associated with eschar exci-
                                                               NS/LR @ 8–10 mL/kg/h                    sion, usually the first part of the procedure. For pa-
                                                               Keep UO @ 0.5–1 mL/kg/h.                tients without contraindications to hemodilution
                                                               Blood: ~200 mL/1% BSA excised           (e.g., CAD, anemia), it is often better to delay PRBC
                                                               and grafted.                            transfusion until major blood loss is complete. IV
                                                               Fluid warmer                            hyperalimentation should be continued during
                                                               T&C 2–4 U PRBC (to keep ahead).         surgery or replaced with 10% dextrose infusion to
                                                                                                       avoid hypoglycemia. If sudden ↓ BP occurs during
                                                                                                       very rapid infusion of blood (> 150 mL/min), con-
                                                                                                       sider using Ca++ to counteract the chelating effect of
                                                                                                       citrate. Avoid fluid overload, especially if patient has
                                                                                                       ARDS, is a small child, or is elderly. As the surgical
                                                                                                       site is superficial, there is not much 3rd-space loss.

===== PAGE 1173 =====
Free Skin Graft for Burn Wound (with Tangential Excision, Excision to Fascia, or Debridement)                  1173

                    Thermal                    Room = 80–82°F                             Temperature must be monitored throughout the
                      considerations           Warm all fluids.                           case. The surgeon should be notified if patient’s
                                               Humidify gases.                            core T is dropping.
                                               Warming blanket
                                               Reflective head cover

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)             ECG may require needle electrodes or alligator clip
                                               + ART line                                 electrodes to skin graft samples if there is no skin
                                               ± CVP line                                 availability to apply adhesive electrodes. The hemo-
                                               ± PA catheter/TEE                          dynamically unstable patient should be monitored
                                                                                          with a PA catheter/TEE and ART line.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                  The burn patient may be uniquely susceptible to
                                               3 eyes                                     laryngeal or upper airway edema in the prone po-
                                                                                          sition; therefore, examination of the upper airway
                                                                                          before extubation is recommended to avoid emer-
                                                                                          gent reintubation.

                    Complications              Massive blood loss
                                               VTE

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications                   Hypothermia                                   May occur as the result of massive blood
                                                    Coagulopathy                                  loss and replacement.

                    Transport                       Continue cardiopulmonary                      Verify adequacy of transport ventilation sys-
                                                    monitoring.                                   tem before departing OR.
                                                    High minute-ventilation
                                                    requirements
                                                    ↑ PIP
                                                    ↑ PEEP

                    Pain management                 Oral methadone or sustained-                  Titrate analgesia to effect.
                                                    release morphine sulfate
                                                    IV fentanyl or morphine sulfate

                    Tests                           Hct, ABG, electrolytes, PT, PTT, Plt, if massive transfusion given.

                                                                                                                                                              Reconstructive Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                   Plastic and
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Barret JP: Burns reconstruction. BMJ 2004; 329:274–6.
                     2. Edrich T, Friedrich A, Eltzschig HK: Ketamine for long-term sedation and analgesia of a burn patient. Anest Analg 2004;
                        99:893–5.
                     3. Harbin KR, Norris TE: Anesthetic management of patients with major burn injury. AANA J 2012; 80(6):430–9.
                     4. Karaaslan P, Arsian G, Basaran O, et al: Anesthesia management in pediatric burn patients: experience of one center. Burns
                        2007; 33(1 Suppl 1):S50–1.
                     5. Kearns RD, Cairns CB, Holmes JH IV, Rich PB, Cairns BA: Thermal burn care: a review of best practices. What should
                        prehospital providers do for these patients? EMS World 2013; 42(1):43–51.
                     6. Moran KT, O’Reilly TJ, Furman W, et al: A new algorithm for calculation of blood loss in excisional burn surgery. Am Surg
                        1988; 54(4):207–8.
                     7. Osler T, Glance LG, Hosmer DW: Simplified estimates of the probability of death after burn injuries: extending and updating
                        the BAUX score. J Trauma 2010; 68(3):690–7.
                     8. Tenenhaus M, Rennekampff HO: Surgical advances in burn and reconstructive plastic surgery: new and emerging
                        technologies. Clin Plast Surg 2012; 39(4):435–43.

