# 12_PEDIATRIC
# Source: 12 PEDIATRIC.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 12.0 Pediatric Surgery
# Pages: 1178-16
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Closure Of Myelomeningocele (p. 1181)
- Surgical Correction Of Occult Spinal Dysraphism (p. 1184)
- Craniotomy For Vein Of Galen Malformation (p. 1187)
- Ventriculoscopy And Third Ventriculostomy (p. 1190)
- Pediatric Brain Arteriovenous Malformations (Avm) (p. 1194)
- Myringotomy And Tympanostomy Tube Placement (p. 1210)
- Tonsillectomy And Adenoidectomy (p. 1212)
- Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy (p. 1216)
- Laryngoscopy, Supraglottoplasty, Excision Of Laryngeal Lesions (p. 1217)
- Removal Of Branchial Cleft Cyst Or Thyroglossal Duct Cyst (p. 1221)
- Incision/Drainage Of Deep Neck Abscess (p. 1222)
- Laryngotracheoplasty (p. 1224)
- Pediatric Tracheostomy (p. 1229)
- Surgery For Atrial Septal Defect (Ostium Secundum) (p. 1232)
- Surgery For Atrioventricular Canal Defect (p. 1237)
- Surgery For Ventricular Septal Defect (p. 1241)
- Surgery For Coarctation Of The Aorta (p. 1248)
- Surgery For Tetralogy Of Fallot (p. 1252)
- Surgery For Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection (p. 1258)
- Surgery For Complete Transposition Of The Great Arteries (p. 1262)
- Surgery For Truncus Arteriosus (p. 1267)
- Surgery For Tricuspid Atresia (p. 1270)
- Surgery For Double-Outlet Right Ventricle (p. 1274)
- Resection Of Cystic Hygroma, Branchial Cleft Cyst, Thyroglossal Duct Cyst, Or Other Cervical Mass (p. 1282)
- Esophagus-Foreign Body Removal And Dilation (p. 1285)
- Repair Of Tracheoesophageal Fistula And Esophageal Atresia (p. 1287)
- Mediastinal Mass—Biopsy Or Resection (p. 1292)
- Neonatal Lung Resection (p. 1295)
- Drainage Of Empyema (p. 1299)
- Repair Of Pectus Excavatum/Carinatum (p. 1301)
- Esophageal Replacement, Colon Interposition (p. 1305)
- Repair Of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (p. 1308)
- Wilms’ Tumor, Hepatic Tumors (p. 1316)
- Necrotizing Enterocolitis (p. 1320)
- Repair Of Biliary Atresia And Choledochal Cysts (p. 1323)
- Omphalocele/Gastroschisis (p. 1327)
- Pull-Through For Hirschsprung’S Disease (p. 1331)
- Pull-Through For Imperforate Anus, Cloaca (p. 1335)
- Hydrocele (p. 1337)
- Resection Of Sacrococcygeal Teratoma (p. 1342)
- Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment (Exit) Procedure (p. 1346)
- Kidney And Upper Urinary Tract Operations (p. 1358)
- Transurethral Procedures (p. 1363)
- Open Bladder Operations (p. 1365)
- Bladder Augmentation (p. 1367)
- Vaginoplasty, Urethroplasty) (p. 1371)
- Inguinoscrotal Procedures (p. 1374)
- Laparoscopic Procedures (p. 1377)
- Percutaneous Pinning Of Displaced Supracondylar Humerus Fracture (p. 1384)
- Closed Or Open Reduction Of Displaced Lateral Condyle Humerus Fracture (p. 1386)
- Aspiration And Injection Of Unicameral Bone Cyst (p. 1387)
- Release For Torticollis (p. 1389)
- Pollicization Of A Finger (p. 1390)
- Syndactyly Repair (p. 1392)
- Posterior Spinal Instrumentation And Fusion (p. 1396)
- Anterior Spinal Fusion For Scoliosis (p. 1399)
- Pelvic Osteotomy (p. 1401)
- Acetabular Augmentation (Shelf) & Chiari Osteotomy (p. 1404)
- Ober Fasciotomy, Yount-Ober Release (p. 1405)
- Hip, Open Reduction & Femoral Shortening (p. 1407)
- Adductor Release Or Transfer, Psoas Release (p. 1409)
- Pinning Of Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis (Scfe) (p. 1410)
- Flexible Intramedullary Nailing Of Long-Bone Fractures (p. 1412)
- Proximal Femoral Osteotomy (p. 1414)
- Epiphysiodesis (p. 1415)
- Sofield Procedure (p. 1417)
- Limb Lengthening (p. 1418)
- Patellar Realignment (p. 1420)
- Tendon Transfer, Lengthening (Posterior Tibial) (p. 1422)
- Triple Arthrodesis And Grice Procedure (Extra-Articular Subtalar Arthrodesis) (p. 1423)
- Surgical Correction Of Clubfoot (p. 1425)
- Surgery For Epidermolysis Bullosa (p. 1431)
- Surgical Correction Of Craniosynostosis (p. 1436)
- Major Secondary Craniofacial Surgical Procedures (p. 1442)
- Cleft Lip Repair—Unilateral/Bilateral (p. 1447)
- Palatoplasty (p. 5)
- Pharyngoplasty (p. 8)
- Alveolar Cleft Repair With Bone Graft (p. 11)
- Secondary Cleft Lip/Nasal Surgery (p. 12)
- Otoplasty (p. 17)
- Pediatric Renal Transplantation (p. 22)
- Pediatric Liver Transplantation (p. 26)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

           12.0 PEDIATRIC
                                       SURGERY

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.1 Pediatric
                                           Neurosurgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Michael Edwards, MD
                                           Sam Cheshier, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Michael I. Chen, MD
                                           William W. Feaster, MD

===== PAGE 1178 =====
Craniofacial Surgery
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Craniofacial surgery is a broad term that refers to both cranial and/or facial reconstructive proce-
                                   dures for cranial dysostosis or craniofacial dysmorphism. Cranial dysostosis is the congenital maldevelopment of the
                                   cranial base and/or vault, 2° premature fusion of cranial sutures. More commonly referred to as craniosynostosis,
                                   the surgical correction of this disorder involves removal of the affected suture(s) and reconstruction of the cranial,
                                   orbital, or facial bones. The most common form of craniosynostosis—scaphocephaly—is caused by the fusion of the
                                   sagittal suture, which leads to a long and narrow calvarium. Other forms of craniosynostosis, in order of decreasing
                                   frequency, are coronal synostosis (brachycephaly), metopic synostosis (trigonocephaly), and lambdoidal synostosis
                                   (posterior plagiocephaly). Deformational occipital plagiocephaly refers to flattening of the occiput 2° preferential sleep
                                   position and the resultant deformation of the skull, ear, and face. This condition is not a form of craniosynostosis, and
                                   despite the potential for significant flattening of the head, reconstructive surgery is not indicated. Crouzon and Apert
                                   syndromes are inherited craniofacial disorders associated with craniosynostosis and facial/orbital dysmorphism. The
                                   facial deformities common to Crouzon and Apert are shallow and misplaced orbits, exophthalmos, and midface hypo-
                                   plasia. In each form of craniosynostosis, sporadic or inherited, the abnormality is present at birth, but may not become
                                   recognizable until the rapid phase of brain growth, occurring in the 1st year of life, begins to accentuate the limitations
                                   on skull shape produced by the premature suture closure. In simple terms, the growth of the underlying brain drives
                                   the expansion of the skull, and closure of a suture produces reduced skull growth in the opposite direction.
                                   Early recognition and correction of craniosynostosis results in the best cosmetic and neurologic outcome because,
                                   with release of the fused suture, the growing brain helps correct the abnormal cranial shape. Most procedures are
                                   scheduled during the 1st 6 mo of life; thus, the issue of blood volume and replacement becomes a critical factor for
                                   surgical and anesthetic consideration. The main principles of surgical treatment of craniosynostosis involve removal
                                   of the abnormal suture through a craniectomy or craniotomy, followed by reconstruction of the calvarium and/or
                                   orbit to overcome the cranial deformity and optimize the chance for normal cranial development. The surgery most
                                   often is done in conjunction with a pediatric neurosurgeon and a plastic surgeon. Patient positioning varies, depend-
                                   ing on the approach to the craniectomy, and is generally prone for sagittal and lambdoidal synostosis and supine for
                                   coronal and metopic synostosis. Another surgical principle important for synostosis surgery is to minimize intraop
                                   blood loss. The surgical team should make every effort to reduce blood loss during the procedure by infiltrating the
                                   scalp with 1:400,000 epinephrine, using point electrocautery, preserving the pericranium, and fastidiously waxing
                                   the bone edges. The most common skin incision is a bicoronal opening that allows for access to the entire calvarium.
                                   The extent of the bone removal and reconstruction varies, depending on the type and number of sutures involved.
                                   Surgical correction of patients with Crouzon or Apert syndromes is often staged with correction of the cranial com-
                                   ponent, followed by a later procedure for the face, as described by Tessier and colleagues. Invariably, blood loss
                                   occurs from the scalp and bone, and the surgeon must remain mindful of the volume contained within the surgical
                                   field and readily communicate to the anesthesiologist when bleeding is felt to be either continuous or excessive.
                                   Injury to the underlying dural venous sinuses is rare, but the potential for catastrophic blood loss is great. Recent
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   advances in endoscopy have led to the development of minimally invasive techniques for craniosynostosis in some
                                   centers, and reports suggest that use of the endoscope may reduce blood loss. Recombinant erythropoietin admin-
                                   istered preop also has been studied in an attempt to reduce the need for intraop transfusion associated with repair
                                   of craniosynostosis. Rarely are subgaleal or epidural drains placed at the close of the procedure. The patient is moni-
                                   tored closely in the PICU for postop bleeding that may require additional transfusions in the 1st 24 h after surgery.
                                   In healthy infants, hematocrit values of 21–23 are tolerated, reducing the need for and amount of blood transfusion.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Craniosynostosis (sagittal, coronal, metopic, lambdoidal); craniofacial dysmorphism;
                                   Apert syndrome; Crouzon syndrome; Pfeiffer syndrome; Saethre-Chotzen syndrome

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine or prone (less common); or table 180°

                                    Incision                 Bicoronal, biparietal, Meisterschnitt, midsagittal

                                    Special                  Midas Rex craniotome; absorbable plates and screws, Colorado needle
                                      instrumentation

                            1178

===== PAGE 1179 =====
Craniofacial Surgery      1179

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Unique                 ↑ ICP and/or hydrocephalus may coexist. ↑ ICP is usually seen with multiple-suture synostosis;
                       considerations       it rarely occurs in single-suture craniosynostosis (< 5–10%). Hydrocephalus typically is seen in
                                            monogenic conditions (e.g., Apert, Crouzon). Most neurosurgeons shunt the hydrocephalus and
                                            treat the ↑ ICP prior to craniosynostosis surgery.

                     Antibiotics            Vancomycin (15 mg/kg) or ceftriaxone (25–50 mg/kg; do not mix with Ca++-containing solutions)
                                            for cranial surgery. Vancomycin or cefotaxime (50 mg/kg) for craniofacial surgery involving nasal
                                            sinuses (for 1 mo or 50 kg).

                     Closing                Watch for ↑ blood loss from the scalp. To prevent excessive blood loss, reapproximate only one
                       considerations       portion of the scalp at a time.

                     EBL                    Highly variable; must be minimized. Amount depends on the preoperative condition, number of
                                            sutures involved, age of the patient, and magnitude of the repair. Operative injury to the venous
                                            sinuses may be catastrophic if hemostasis cannot be achieved or volume loss is excessive.

                     Postop care            PICU. Postop Hct/Hb levels required. If significant blood loss occurs during surgery, INR and
                                            coagulation parameters should be obtained. Blood transfusion is often necessary in infants (< 10 kg)
                                            or if Hct is between 21 and 23.

                     Mortality              < 1–2%

                     Morbidity              Meningitis
                                            Infection
                                            CSF rhinorrhea
                                            Pseudomeningocele formation due to unrecognized dural tear
                                            ↑ ICP (2° skull reshaping)
                                            Venous thrombosis or injury
                                            Neurological injury: Rare

                     Pain score             1–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Newborn–young adult

                     Male:Female            1.2:1

                     Incidence              1/2000/yr

                     Etiology               Sporadic; heritable (monogenic and chromosomal syndromes); environmentally induced (amniotic
                                            bands, iatrogenic)

                     Associated             Congenital defects (limbs, heart, brain, kidneys); hydrocephalus; encephalocele (sincipital/basal);
                       conditions           fibrous dysplasia; craniometaphyseal dysplasia; holoprosencephaly

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Surgeons can repair the same craniosynostosis in several ways. It can range from a minor (endoscopic) to moderate
                   (strip craniotomy) to major (cranial vault remodeling) surgery. If a surgeon chooses to perform less than a complete
                   cranial vault remodeling, there is a higher possibility that a revision may be necessary in the future. The anesthetist
                   must fully understand the surgeon’s plan to prepare for the issues that are more common with major surgery. The
                   main issues are airway management and bleeding. Management of these issues is made more difficult because the
                   repair is usually performed during the first 6 months of life.

                    Airway/                  Patients with craniosynostosis are often challenging intubations. Special considerations
                       Respiratory           should be taken to ensure that their skull is well positioned prior to induction of anes-
                                             thesia. Because Crouzon and Apert’s syndrome are associated with midface hypoplasia,
                                             the patient should be carefully evaluated for a difficult airway, and preparations should be
                                             made if one is anticipated. This may include FOI or Video laryngoscope.

===== PAGE 1180 =====
1180   CHAPTER 12.1           Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Neurological              Presenting Sx in infants with craniosynostosis include progressive head deformation, pro-
                                                             gressively increasing irritability, crying, failure to eat, and failure to grow in head circum-
                                                             ference. These Sx may be due in part to ↑ ICP. On physical examination, one or more of the
                                                             cranial sutures are fused. Infants with other types of craniofacial deformity usually have no
                                                             Sx related to their abnormalities.

                                   Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P. Preop Hct, Hgb, platelets, INR

                                   Premedication             Premedication is generally not necessary because the surgery is generally performed on
                                                             infants. However, if necessary, midazolam 0.5 mg/kg can be used (see p. D-1), and sedatives
                                                             may be contraindicated in the patient with ↑ ICP.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. The room and the bed should be kept warm prior to incision because the time from
                                   induction to draping may be extensive for line placement. Infants can unexpectedly cool rapidly during this period
                                   resulting in coagulopathies. There is no role for intraoperative cooling (neuroprotection) in craniosynostosis repair.

                                   Induction                 Standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1). Tape the tube firmly in place at one side of the
                                                             mouth using benzoin adherent. Some surgeons like to suture the ETT in place. Verify ETT
                                                             placement after the patient is in final position (see p. D-2). In prone patient, the anesthesia is
                                                             usually placed in a horseshoe and not pinned for this procedure. For supine cases, the surgery
                                                             usually involves reflection of the scalp down over the eyes and nose. Cornea shields or sutur-
                                                             ing the eyelids shut is preferred over eye tape.

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. D-2). Muscle relaxation is useful during line placement and
                                                             positioning. The surgeon may request mild hypotension during the removal of the bone
                                                             flap to minimize bleeding. Hyperventilation to PCO2 of 30 is often desired to lower the ICP
                                                             at the beginning of the case.

                                   Emergence                 If the case is uncomplicated, the patient is extubated and goes to PICU for observation. In
                                                             the rare situation that large amounts of blood products are transfused, extubation should
                                                             be handled with care, as facial and airway swelling may result in airway compromise or loss
                                                             of airway. Leave intubated if in doubt. If the ETT or eyes are sutured shut, the suture should
                                                             be removed prior to extubation.

                                   Blood and fluid           Mod-to-large blood loss                   Administer crystalloid and blood products as
                                      requirements           IV: 20–22 ga × 2–3                        needed. Most of the bleeding is occult (lost in the
                                                             NS/LR @ 4 mL/kg/h                         drapes and sponges), and so it is not uncommon to
                                                             5% albumin                                begin transfusion pRBCs during incision to avoid
                                                             Fluid warmer                              getting behind. Correct any intraoperative coagu-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                                       lopathies. Aggressive transfusion must be tempered
                                                                                                       to prevent increased ICP. A tight dura may result in
                                                                                                       risk of dural sinus injury or get in the way of replac-
                                                                                                       ing the bone flaps. Tranexamic acid (TXA) 50 mg/
                                                                                                       kg followed by infusion of 5 mg/kg/hr has been
                                                                                                       shown to decrease blood loss.

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                                             ± Foley catheter                         Surgery is rarely done in sitting position so life-
                                                             ± Doppler                                threatening venous embolism is rare. Due to the
                                                             ± Arterial line                          young age of these patients, a central line may be dif-
                                                             ± CVP line                               ficult. Some surgeons feel that an IJ central line may
                                                                                                      decrease venous drainage in infants. ↑ K+ and ↓ Ca++
                                                                                                      may occur with transfusions of blood products.

                                   Positioning               OR table usually rotated 180°.           Prevent compression to the patient’s thorax by plac-
                                                             3 and pad pressure points                ing a Mayo stand over the chest area.
                                                             3 eyes

===== PAGE 1181 =====
Closure of Myelomeningocele             1181

                    Complications               Major blood loss
                                                VAE                                          Treatment of venous air embolism—notify sur-
                                                                                             geon who will flood the field with saline, D/C N2O,
                                                                                             attempt to aspirate air from CVP, if present. Lower
                                                                                             head of bed, compress jugular veins to decrease the
                                                                                             rate of air entry. CPR as needed. PEEP is not recom-
                                                                                             mended and may be deleterious. VAE more likely if
                                                                                             dural sinus entered.

                         POSTOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS

                    Complications               Bleeding                                     Significant bleeding may continue in the postop
                                                Extubation                                   period.
                                                Hypovolemia

                    Pain                        Parenteral opioids (see p. E-1).             Fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg q 60 min or morphine 0.05–
                      management                Avoid oversedation.                          0.1 mg/kg q 2 h.

                    Tests                       Hct/Hb                                       Hct/Hb levels are necessary to determine adequacy of
                                                Coagulation parameters                       blood replacement. Monitor closely for hypovolemia.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bissonnette B, Brady KM, Wasley RB: Anesthesia for neurosurgical procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds.
                        Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 540–569.
                     2. Dahmani S, et al: Perioperative blood salvage during surgical correction of craniosynostosis in infants. Br J Anesth 2000; 85(4):
                        550–5.
                     3. Fearon JA: Reducing allogenic blood transfusions during pediatric cranial vault surgical procedures: a prospective analysis of
                        blood recycling. Plast Reconstr Surg 2004; 113(4):1126–30.
                     4. Fearon JA, Weinthal J: The use of recombinant erythropoietin in the reduction of blood transfusion rated in craniosynostosis
                        repair in infants and children. Plast Reconstr Surg 2002; 109(7):2190–6.
                     5. Goobie SM, Meier PM, Pereira LM, et al: Effect of tranexamic acid in pediatric craniosynostosis surgery: a double-blind,
                        placebo-controlled trial. Anesthesiology 2011; 144(4):862–71.
                     6. Hoffman HJ: Congenital malformations of the spine and skull. In: Goldsmith HS, ed. Practice of Surgery. Harper & Row, New
                        York: 1980.
                     7. Jimenez DF, Barone CM, Cartwright CC, et al: Early management of craniosynostosis using endoscopic-assisted strip
                        craniectomies and cranial orthotic molding therapy. Pediatrics 2002; 110:97–104.
                     8. Tessier P: Relationship of craniostenoses to craniofacial dysostoses and to faciostenoses: a study with therapeutic implications.
                        Plast Reconstr Surg 1971; 48(3):224–37.
                     9. Vavilala MS, Soriano SG: Anesthesia for neurosurgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for
                        Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 713–45.

                                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                   Closure of Myelomeningocele
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Myelomeningocele is a neural tube defect characterized by failure of the spinal cord to fuse posteriorly
                   during primary neurulation. This results in an open neural placode joined to the incomplete epithelial defect, usually
                   located in the thoracolumbar spine, and rarely in the cervical spine. Associated CNS conditions are hydrocephalus and
                   Chiari II hindbrain malformation, both of which usually contribute more to long-term morbidity than to the spinal cord
                   defect itself. The presence of the myelomeningocele may be detected before birth by high-resolution ultrasound and/or
                   elevated maternal serum alpha fetoprotein, as well as fetal MRI scans. The incidence of neural tube defects is declining
                   in the United States, possibly due to maternal dietary folate supplementation and prenatal Dx and selective termination.
                   The fundamental goals of surgery are preservation of neural tissue, reconstitution of a normal intrathecal environ-
                   ment, and complete skin closure to prevent a spinal fluid leak and meningitis. Despite a very thin parchment of
                   dystrophic epithelium attached to the placode, most myelomeningoceles leak spinal fluid from the time of birth.

===== PAGE 1182 =====
1182   CHAPTER 12.1           Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Because of the risk of ventriculitis associated with the exposed subarachnoid space, closure of the myelomeningocele
                                   is recommended within 72 h after birth. Infants with neural tube defects have a higher incidence of other congenital
                                   anomalies, including neurogenic bladder and bowel, hydronephrosis, malrotation of the gut, VSD or ASD, and cra-
                                   niofacial disorders. The neonate should be screened for these potential abnormalities before undergoing surgery and,
                                   in general, this can be accomplished within 24 h after birth. During the procedure, the child is in the prone position.
                                   The defect is dissected so that the various anatomic layers can be separated. The edges of the placode (spinal cord)
                                   are mobilized from the adjacent epithelium and often imbricated to form a closed tube. The laterally displaced dura is
                                   dissected from the fascia and closed over the spinal cord, thus reconstituting the elements of the spine, except for the
                                   lamina defect that is not reconstructed. The paraspinous muscle and fascia are mobilized as a separate layer and the
                                   subcutaneous and skin layers comprise the final layer. In cases of large defects, local skin or myocutaneous flaps may
                                   be necessary to cover the spinal defect adequately. Progressive hydrocephalus usually presents within days to weeks
                                   after closure of the myelomeningocele, but ~15% of patients will present at birth with significant hydrocephalus that
                                   requires early insertion of a VP shunt. Finally, in rare circumstances, prominent vertebral angulation, or kyphosis, at
                                   the defect could necessitate vertebrectomies to reestablish normal spinal alignment, usually at an older age.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: The efficacy of intrauterine myelomeningocele repair is currently being
                                   explored through a randomized multicenter trial, and the results may alter future approaches in favor of intrauterine
                                   closure if the incidence of hydrocephalus and neurologic deficit is reduced in these patients.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Myelomeningocele; myeloschesis; meningocele; myelodysplasia; spina bifida aperta

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Prone with rolls under chest and hips

                                    Incision                Surrounding the defect, preserving skin that can be utilized in the closure. Use of plain lidocaine
                                                            (0.25%) local anesthetic decreases blood loss.

                                    Special                 Loupes or operating microscope
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Concomitant hydrocephalus, lower brain stem dysfunction. Need for blood replacement rare in
                                      considerations        straightforward cases. Latex precautions should be used in all cases (p. G-1).

                                    Antibiotics             Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg iv), do not infuse with Ca++-containing solutions; vancomycin
                                                            (15 mg/kg iv, infuse over 60 min)

                                    Surgical time           1.5–3 h

                                    Closing                 Skin closure may be complex and require rotation of flaps or aid of plastic surgeon.
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                     Negligible–25 mL (in most cases)

                                    Postop care             Neonatal nursery. Postop, child often nursed on stomach or side. Head size and head ultrasound
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            are used to monitor for development of progressive hydrocephalus, which may require shunting.

                                    Mortality               Approaching zero

                                    Morbidity               Meningitis/ventriculitis
                                                            Hind brain dysfunction
                                                            Wound infection
                                                            CSF leak
                                                            Apnea, vocal cord paralysis

                                    Pain score              3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Newborn (diagnosed at birth)

                                    Male:Female             ~1:1

                                    Incidence               1/1000 live births

===== PAGE 1183 =====
Closure of Myelomeningocele        1183

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Etiology               Congenital

                     Associated             Hydrocephalus; lower extremity weakness; bowel and/or bladder dysfunction (neurogenic
                       conditions           bladder) and/or hydronephrosis; scoliosis; Chiari II malformations; congenital cardiac anomalies
                                             **NB: Latex allergy is increased in this population. Latex precautions should be used beginning
                                             with the 1st operation. See Appendix G.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Myelomeningoceles are congenital abnormalities of the spinal cord that result in a saccular protrusion near the base
                   of the spine. The sac, containing neural elements and CSF, can vary in size from very small to a volume that occupies
                   the whole lower spinal region. The Dx may be suspected from maternal alpha-fetoprotein screening, fetal ultrasound,
                   or prenatal MRI and is confirmed at birth. It is generally believed that immediate repair of the sac and covering of
                   the defect with skin is desirable to preserve neurological function and avoid infections. These newborns, therefore,
                   usually are brought to surgery within 24–72 h after birth.

                    Cardiovascular          May have associated congenital anomalies.
                                            Test: ECHO

                    Neurological            Although difficult to assess at this age, newborns may have motor and/or sensory deficits
                                            in the lower extremities, neurogenic bladder, and lower cranial nerve dysfunction. Most
                                            have an Arnold-Chiari malformation, which requires a ventriculoperitoneal shunt after the
                                            myelomeningocele repair.

                    Renal                   May have associated congenital anomalies.
                                            Tests: Renal ultrasound

                    Laboratory              Routine preop studies

                    Premedication           None necessary

                    Other                   NB: Latex precautions for all patients (beginning from birth). See p. G-1.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA using pediatric circle is preferred; forced air warmer; warm room to 75–80°F. Spinal
                   anesthesia has been reported.

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                    Induction               Before induction, the patient is placed in the supine position, and the back defect is
                                            protected by a sterile donut or rolls to prevent pressure on or rupture of defect. Patients
                                            usually will come to the OR with an iv in place, allowing for a standard iv induction
                                            (see p. D-1). If not, a standard inhalational induction followed by establishment of iv
                                            access is indicated. See p. D-1. Sevoflurane is preferred because of its low blood–gas
                                            partition coefficient and absence of airway irritability, which allows a smooth, rapid
                                            induction. Oral ETT intubation usually follows muscle relaxation with rocuronium
                                            (0.6–1 mg/kg) or vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg). Atropine (0.05–0.1 mg) may be administered
                                            before intubation to reduce secretions and to prevent reflex bradycardia. Verify ETT place-
                                            ment and tape tube securely in place at one side of the mouth with benzoin adherent to
                                            facilitate prone positioning.

                    Maintenance             Sevoflurane 2–3% or isoflurane 1–2% or less, with N2O or air/O2 mixture to maintain arte-
                                            rial O2 sat at 95–97%. Depending on duration of operation, additional doses of rocuronium
                                            (0.3 mg/kg) or vecuronium (0.05 mg/kg) may be needed. Maintain a near-normal BP.
                                            Maintain normal temp by keeping OR warm (78°F) and using warming lights and forced
                                            air warming as needed. Ventilation is controlled to maintain PetCO2 = 35–40 mm Hg.

===== PAGE 1184 =====
1184   CHAPTER 12.1             Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Emergence                   Patients undergoing simple repair are usually extubated at the end of the case after reversal
                                                               of the muscle relaxants. Those undergoing complex repair with fascial releases and a tight
                                                               abdomen almost always remain intubated for the 1st 24 hours. The newborn is nursed in
                                                               the prone or lateral positions for the first few days postop.

                                   Blood and fluid             IV: 22–24 ga × 1                            Administer crystalloid, usually D10 ¼ NS, via a con-
                                      requirements             D10 @ 2–4 mL/kg/h (newborn)                 tinuous infusion pump, etc. Blood is rarely, if ever,
                                                               D10 ¼ NS @ 4 mL/kg/h (> 24 h)               necessary.
                                                               Warm fluids.

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                                   Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   Prone with shoulders and hips on bolsters to elevate
                                                               3 eyes                                      abdomen off operating table. Head turned to the
                                                                                                           side, which results in the ETT being furthest from
                                                                                                           the bed. 3 tube placement by listening for bilateral
                                                                                                           breath sounds after repositioning.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               CSF leak
                                                               Wound healing complications
                                                               Infection
                                                               Hydrocephalus
                                                               Renal failure
                                                               Respiratory compromise from a tight abdomen

                                   Pain                        Parenteral opioids (see p. E-3).
                                     management

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Cochrane D, Irwin B, Chambers K: Clinical outcomes that fetal surgery for myelomeningocele needs to achieve. Eur J Pediatr
                                        Surg 2001; 22(Suppl 1):S18–20.
                                     2. Cragen J, Roberts H, Edmonds L, et al: Surveillance for anencephaly and spina bifida and the impact of prenatal diagnosis -
                                        United States, 1985-1994. Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 1995; 44(S-4):1–13.
                                     3. Ferschl M, Ball R, Lee H, Rollins MD: Anesthesia for in utero repair of myelomeningocele. Anesthesiology 2013; 118(5):
                                        1211–23.
                                     4. Gupta N, Farrell JA, Rand L, Cauldwell CB, Farmer D: Open fetal surgery for myelomeningocele. J Neurosurg Pediatr 2012;
                                        9(3):265–73.
                                     5. Idowu OE, Oyeleke SO: Spinal anesthesia and monitored conscious sedation for repair of infantile meningomyelocele. Childs
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        Nerv Syst 2011; 27(11):1985–8.
                                     6. Tulipan N, Sutton LN, Bruner JP, et al: The effect of intrauterine myelomeningocele repair on the incidence of shunt-dependent
                                        hydrocephalus. Pediatr Neurosurg 2003; 38(1):27–33.

                                   Surgical Correction of Occult Spinal
                                   Dysraphism
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Occult spinal dysraphism covers a spectrum of spinal anomalies generally related to defects in
                                   secondary neurulation, in contrast to a myelomeningocele, which occurs as a result of defective primary neuru-
                                   lation. These forms of congenital spinal defects are covered by intact skin and share the common pathophysiol-
                                   ogy of spinal cord tethering. Occult spinal dysraphism includes tight filum terminale, intramedullary lipoma,
                                   lipomyelomeningocele, split cord malformations (diastematomyelia), dermal sinus tracts, meningocele manque,

===== PAGE 1185 =====
Surgical Correction of Occult Spinal Dysraphism        1185

                   neurenteric cyst, and myelocystocele. Each of these lesions can result in a tethering, or stretching, of the spinal
                   cord as the vertebral axis elongates during normal growth. The fixed spinal cord is stretched by motion and by
                   the growing spine, resulting in neurological dysfunction, most likely as a result of reduced spinal cord blood
                   flow. Excision of the lesion and release of the tethering elements are recommended to prevent either the onset or
                   worsening of cord dysfunction.
                   The surgical principles for correction of occult spinal dysraphism involve excision of the intradural lesion and release
                   of the tissue element that is tethering the spinal cord, while preserving the normal neural structures. In cases of tight
                   filum terminale, this is easily accomplished with little threat to the spinal cord or nerve root function, whereas exci-
                   sion of lipomyelomeningoceles may be extremely challenging procedures. Any tethering lesion needs to be carefully
                   separated from the spinal cord and adjacent nerve roots without disrupting neurological function. Intraop neuro-
                   physiological monitoring may be a useful adjunct to monitor cord and nerve root function during the dissection and
                   release of the tethering lesion. Following the intradural procedure, closure of the dura and myofascial layers is critical
                   in prevention of postop spinal fluid leaks, and dural grafts may be necessary in some cases.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Tethered spinal cord; fibrolipoma filum terminale; lipomyelomeningocele; lipoma of the
                   filum; diastematomyelia; spinal dysraphism; dermal sinus tract; caudal agenesis; caudal regression, anterior sacral
                   meningocele

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Prone

                     Incision                Posterior midline centered over abnormality

                     Special                 Operating microscope; laser
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Blood replacement with loss of significant amount of blood in the infant (rare).
                       considerations        Minimal latex exposure

                     Antibiotics             Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg iv; do not use with Ca++-containing solutions); or vancomycin
                                             (10–15 mg/kg iv over 60 minutes, max 1 g).

                     Surgical time           1.5–5 h (longer for diastematomyelia and lipomyelomeningocele)

                     Closing                 Surgeon often wants to test integrity of dural closure with Valsalva maneuver: sustained
                       considerations        (10–20 sec) inspiratory pressure at 20–40 cmH2O.

                     EBL                     5–100 mL

                     Postop care             Patient often kept flat postop to prevent CSF leakage and pseudomeningocele.

                     Mortality               Approaching zero

                     Morbidity               Infection

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                                             Neurological deficit
                                             Aseptic meningitis
                                             CSF leak
                                             Pseudomeningocele formation
                                             Urinary dysfunction; check preop renal function, renal U/S

                     Pain score              3–5

                     Other                   Latex precautions (see p. G-1).

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–adults

                     Male:Female             ~1:1

                     Incidence               Uncommon

                     Etiology                Congenital

===== PAGE 1186 =====
1186   CHAPTER 12.1          Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                    Associated             Ankle/foot deformity (talipes); neurologic impairment; neurogenic bowel/bladder; scoliosis; ver-
                                      conditions           tebral abnormalities; VACTERL/VATER association (vertebral, anal, cardiac, tracheoesophageal,
                                                           renal, and limb anomalies); cutaneous anomaly over spine; syringomyelia; caudal agenesis; urinary
                                                           anomalies; check abdominal ultrasound, renal function prior to OR

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   A variety of spinal abnormalities fall under the category of spinal dysraphism, the most common being a tethered
                                   cord or a lipoma of the spinal cord. In the case of the tethered cord, there may be a Hx of myelomeningocele repair
                                   at birth or an overlying cutaneous lesion or mass.

                                   Neurological             Presenting Sx in older children are usually pain in the lower back radiating into the legs
                                                            and/or progressively worsening motor or sensory deficits in the anal region or involving
                                                            the lower extremities (document carefully).

                                   Musculoskeletal          Lower extremity foot deformity as well as sensory or motor deficits may be present and
                                                            should be carefully documented.

                                   Renal                    Renal function may be impaired in patients with Hx of recurrent UTIs.
                                                            Tests: UA; BUN; Cr; others as indicated from H&P

                                   Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication            For children, midazolam 0.5 mg/kg po (see p. D-1) generally provides satisfactory preop
                                                            sedation after ~30 min. For young children (< 5 yr) who refuse PO meds, administration of
                                                            midazolam 0.3 mg/kg intranasally provides rapid amnesia, sedation, and easy separation
                                                            from parents.

                                   Latex allergy            Latex precautions should be used in all patients even at 1st operation. Meningomyelocele
                                                            patients may have developed a latex allergy (see p. G-1).

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                   Induction                Standard induction (see p. D-1) with sevoflurane, N2O, and O2. This is followed by establish-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            ment of iv access, then ETT intubation with the use of a muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium
                                                            1 mg/kg or vecuronium 0.05–0.1 mg/kg). Sevoflurane is preferred because of its rapid,
                                                            smooth induction. Tape the tube firmly in place at one side of the mouth, using benzoin
                                                            adherent to facilitate prone positioning. Latex precautions.

                                   Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. D-2). Upon completion of placement of the dural graft, and
                                                            before closure of the wound, the surgeon will want to check the integrity of the graft to
                                                            eliminate any CSF leaks. The surgeon will ask that positive pressure be applied to the air-
                                                            way to at least 20 cmH2O for 10–20 sec. If graft leaks are detected, they will be repaired
                                                            and the test repeated.

                                   Emergence                The ETT is removed at the conclusion of the anesthetic after reversal of muscle relaxants.
                                                            The patient may be nursed flat in the prone or lateral position for the 1st few days postop
                                                            to lessen the chance of a CSF leak developing.

                                   Blood and fluid          IV: 20–22 ga × 1                          In children, administer fluids via a volumetric infu-
                                      requirements          NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                       sion set. Blood is rarely necessary.

===== PAGE 1187 =====
Craniotomy for Vein of Galen Malformation            1187

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                              ± Foley catheter                           If the operation is anticipated to last several hours,
                                              ± UO                                       or in the case of neurogenic bladder, a Foley cath-
                                                                                         eter should be inserted.

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points                  Prone with the shoulders and hips on bolsters to
                                              3 eyes                                     elevate the abdomen off the operating table. Head
                                                                                         turned to the side, resulting in the ETT being fur-
                                                                                         thest from bed. 3 tube placement by listening for
                                                                                         bilateral breath sounds after repositioning. Position-
                                                                                         ing in larger patients may require a prone headrest.

                    Complications             Severe bradycardia                         Manipulation of the spinal cord may produce ↓↓ HR
                                              Latex allergy                              reflexly. See p. G-1 for latex allergy considerations.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Possible neurological deficits             Major complications from this operation are
                                              Infection                                  uncommon but include new neurological deficits
                                              CSF leak                                   from irritation of the spinal cord during surgery,
                                              Urinary retention                          localized infection, and CSF leak from the wound
                                              Incontinence                               site.

                    Pain                      Parental opioids or PCA
                      management              (see pp. E-3–E-4).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Filippidis AS, Kalani MY, Theodore N, Rekate HL: Spinal cord traction, vascular compromise, hypoxia, and metabolic
                        derangements in the pathophysiology of tethered cord syndrome. Neurosurg Focus 2012; 29(1):E9.
                     2. von Koch CS, Quinones-Hinojosa A, Gulati M, et al: Clinical outcome in children undergoing tethered cord release utilizing
                        intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring. Pediatr Neurosurg 2002; 37(2):81–6.
                     3. Warf BC: Pathophysiology of tethered cord syndrome. In: McLone DG, ed. Pediatric Neurosurgery: Surgery of the Developing
                        Nervous System, 4th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2001, 282–8.
                     4. Zerah M, Kulkarni AV: Spinal cord malformations. Handb Clin Neurol 2013; 112:975–91.

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                   Craniotomy for Vein of Galen Malformation
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A vein of Galen malformation is a large, AV fistula between arteries, mainly of the posterior cerebral
                   circulation, and a massively enlarged vein of Galen (deep venous drainage of the brain). Patients can present with
                   high-output CHF (infants), progressive macrocephaly from hydrocephalus (infants, children, adults), or, rarely, IC
                   hemorrhage in adult patients. Most cases present at birth or during the infant years, and immediate care is often
                   directed toward stabilizing cardiac function related to CHF. Patients undergoing surgery with high-output CHF
                   carry the highest risk of periop mortality. Many patients will have some degree of accompanying hydrocephalus, but
                   decisions regarding the placement of ventricular shunts are best postponed until the malformation has been treated,
                   as hydrocephalus may improve with reduction in intracranial venous pressure. High-output CHF is addressed by
                   treating the fistula. Embolization via the arterial or venous system minimizes resistance or reduces flow in the fistula,
                   improving cardiac function.

===== PAGE 1188 =====
1188   CHAPTER 12.1           Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Treatment is directed at staged occlusion of the arterial feeders to the AV fistula and eventually thrombosis of the
                                   fistula itself from the venous side. Open microsurgical techniques, endovascular methods, or a combination of both
                                   may be used to reduce flow through the malformation. With reduction in the aneurysmal flow, CO will decrease,
                                   SVR will improve, and mixed venous PO2 will decrease. Because of the high mortality associated with treatment by
                                   surgery alone and the advances in endovascular techniques, vein of Galen malformations currently are managed
                                   without direct primary surgical approaches. Surgery, as an option, is more likely to occur in the setting of staged or
                                   attempted embolizations. Subtemporal, midline occipital, or bilateral occipital craniotomies can be used to isolate
                                   and occlude arterial feeders to the malformation. Stereotactic radiosurgery has been used successfully as an adjunct
                                   to embolization for surgery.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Alternative approaches may access the torcular (confluence) of venous sinuses
                                   through a burr hole to allow direct retrograde placement of thrombogenic coils in the AV fistula.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Vein of Galen aneurysm; IC hemorrhage; hydrocephalus; progressive neurologic deficits;
                                   current management focuses on embolization in the cath lab prior to surgical repair

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Lateral decubitus, Concorde (modified prone), or semisitting; for burr hole, lateral

                                    Incision                Temporal or occipital; for burr hole, occipital

                                    Special                 Operating microscope, microscopic instruments; intraop angiography; for burr hole, endovascu-
                                      instrumentation       lar catheters and equipment; intraop SSEP monitoring

                                    Unique                  Careful attention to blood loss in infants
                                      considerations        Central venous access and A-line mandatory

                                    Antibiotics             Vancomycin (1 g iv slowly q 12 h for adults; 10–15 mg/kg iv slowly q 6 h for children); cefo-
                                                            taxime (1 g iv q 6 h for adults; 40 mg/kg iv q 6 h for children)

                                    Surgical time           3–5 h

                                    Closing                 Meticulous hemostasis; avoid ↓ BP or HTN (MAP 80% of usual values).
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                     < 250 mL

                                    Postop care             Monitor for ↑ ICP (use of extraventricular drain) as a result of venous HTN 2° rapid occlusion of
                                                            AV fistula. ICU × 1–3 d.

                                    Mortality               Approaches 100% if high-output CHF not resolved

                                    Morbidity               Deep venous infarct: 5–10%
                                                            Intracranial hemorrhage
                                                            Hydrocephalus
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            Stroke
                                                            Subdural hygroma
                                                            Infection: Rare

                                    Pain score              3–4

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Birth–3 yr (typically)

                                    Male:Female             1:1

                                    Incidence               Rare

                                    Etiology                Congenital

                                    Associated              Other intracranial vascular malformations; high-output CHF
                                      conditions

===== PAGE 1189 =====
Craniotomy for Vein of Galen Malformation          1189

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Vein of Galen vascular malformations are usually diagnosed in infants because of high-output CHF and may cause
                   an abnormal increase in head size due to the aneurysmal dilation and obstruction of the dural sinus. The abnormal
                   vasculature constitutes a high-flow shunt, much like an AVM. The more severe the CHF, the higher the risk or mor-
                   bidity and mortality during the procedure. Surgical repair is becoming less frequent as interventional radiologists get
                   better at embolization. Patients that present for surgical repair have generally undergone multiple embolizations over
                   months or years. Patients that present to the OR are often the highest risk group. During the procedure hypotension
                   can result in ischemia to the brain (cerebral steal). Hypertension can cause bleeding and stress on the failing heart.
                   Sudden uncontrolled bleeding, the surgery should be anticipated.

                    Cardiovascular           Because these lesions constitute high-flow shunts through the brain, the infants are prone
                                             to develop high-output CHF, which is fatal in more than 40% of patients. Newborns present
                                             with h/o CHF.

                    Neurological             Infants usually present with an abnormal head size, Sz disorder, or bizarre neurological
                                             signs, such as high-pitched crying, posturing, or failure to eat or thrive.

                    Laboratory               CT; MRI; cerebral angiography. The infant may need sedation and anesthetic management
                                             to obtain adequate diagnostic studies. Check renal function.

                    Premedication            For children, midazolam 0.5 mg/kg po (see p. D-1) generally provides satisfactory preop
                                             sedation after ~30 min.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, with the goals being the same as those for IC vascular malformations

                    Induction                Whenever possible, an iv induction is preferred. If the patient does not have advanced
                                             cardiac disease, propofol 1–2 mg/kg, fentanyl 2–3 mcg/kg, and rocuronium 0.6–1 mg/kg
                                             are satisfactory induction agents. If the patient has cardiac compromise, then etomidate or
                                             ketamine should be considered.

                    Maintenance              Neuromonitoring for sensory and motor evoke potentials is commonly used during the
                                             cases. Analgesics like remifentanil (0.05–0.15 mcg/kg/min) or fentanyl infusion do not
                                             affect the patient’s potentials. However, because hypnotic/sedatives do, the choice should
                                             be one with which the neurologist is familiar. Volatile agent (1/2 mac) with or without N2O

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                                             (50%) can be used, but most anesthesiologists use propofol (100–150 mcg/kg/min). Dex-
                                             medetomidine (0.4–0.7 mcg/kg/h) is progressively finding more acceptance as an adjuvant.

                    Emergence                Plan to leave ETT in place for at least 24 h postop; infant should receive controlled ventila-
                                             tion and sedation during that interval.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 20–22 ga × 1–2                      Prepare for sudden blood loss. Blood should be
                       requirements          Central venous access                   available in the room and transfused as needed. IVF
                                                                                     should be used judiciously when there is no bleed-
                                                                                     ing in order not to cause cerebral swelling, which
                                                                                     can hinder a surgeon’s progress. A central venous
                                                                                     line may be useful. A subclavian approach is pre-
                                                                                     ferred over an IJ approach because it may compro-
                                                                                     mise cerebral venous drainage.

                    Control of brain         Same as for AVMs (see p. 21).
                      volume

===== PAGE 1190 =====
1190   CHAPTER 12.1            Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Monitoring                 Same as for AVMs (see p. 21).

                                   Control of BP              Goal = normal range for age               Tight blood pressure control is essential for optimal
                                                                                                        surgical conditions and patient perfusion. Keep-
                                                                                                        ing the BP within 10% of the age-appropriate range
                                                                                                        should be the goal except when cross-clamping is
                                                                                                        necessary. Vasoactive infusions to raise blood pres-
                                                                                                        sure (epinephrine or neosynephrine) should be
                                                                                                        chosen based on HR. An antihypertensive infu-
                                                                                                        sion (nicardipine, nitroprusside, esmolol) is useful.
                                                                                                        Labelolol can be used for less complex cases. Tachy-
                                                                                                        cardia should generally be avoided.

                                   Positioning                Same as for AVMs.

                                   Complications              Coagulopathy                              If large volumes of blood are needed, a coagulopa-
                                                                                                        thy may ensue. Monitoring of coagulation status
                                                                                                        during surgery is important.
                                                              Hypothermia                               After the aneurysm is surgically corrected, hypo-
                                                                                                        thermia needs to be continued for 24–72 h.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Neurological deficits
                                                              IC hemorrhage
                                                              Heart failure

                                   Pain                       Postop sedation (propofol 50–100 mcg/kg/min, dexmedetomidine, or fentanyl/versed)
                                     management               overnight. When the patient is extubated, then an analgesic (fentanl, morphine, or hydro-
                                                              morphone) may be necessary.

                                   Tests                      Same as for AVMs (see p. 22).
                                                              Most patients will require a postop MRI the following day. It is generally best not to extu-
                                                              bate patients prior to the scan. Some patients may also require a postop cerebral angiogram.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Bissonnette B: Cerebral protection. Pediatr Anesth 2004; 14:403–6.
                                     2. Bissonnette B, Brady KM, Easley RB: Anesthesia for neurosurgical procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds.
                                        Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th ed. Wiley-Blockwell, Oxford: 2012, 540–69.
                                     3. Hassan T, Nassar M, Eighandour M: Vein of Galen aneurysms: presentation and endovascular management. Pediatr
                                        Neurosurg 2012; 46(6):427–34.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                     4. Recinos PF, Rahmathulla G, Pearl M, et al: Vein of Galen malformations: epidemiology, clinical presentations, management.
                                        Neurosurg Clin N Am 2012; 23(1):165–77.
                                     5. Vavilala MS, Soriano SG: Anesthesia for neurosurgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for
                                        Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 713–45.

                                   Ventriculoscopy and Third Ventriculostomy
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Ventriculoscopy is the technique of intraop visualization of the lateral, 3rd, and, occasionally, 4th ven-
                                   tricles using rigid or less commonly fiberoptic endoscopes inserted through standard cranial burr holes. The ventric-
                                   uloscope permits direct inspection and limited navigation within the ventricle for both diagnostic and therapeutic

===== PAGE 1191 =====
Ventriculoscopy and Third Ventriculostomy          1191

                   purposes and often is most commonly applied in the setting of hydrocephalus. In addition to CT scans, preop MRI exam
                   of the brain is obtained to better depict the anatomy of the ventricular system, which is distorted frequently by con-
                   genital lesions. The enlarged ventricles produced by the hydrocephalus contribute to the safety and feasibility of most
                   endoscopic approaches, enabling a variety of procedures. The endoscope can be used to fenestrate multicompartmen-
                   tal periventricular or arachnoid cysts, position ventricular catheters during shunt insertion, biopsy, or, in some cases,
                   resect intraventricular tumors. Neuroendoscopy generally does not help in the initial cannulation of the ventricle
                   (a common misconception).
                   Endoscopic ventriculoscopy may be performed through either frontal or parietal–occipital approaches, with the
                   patient typically supine with the neck slightly flexed. Standard small incisions similar to shunt insertions are used.
                   A twist drill or burr hole is created and the ventricle cannulated by insertion of the shunt catheter or an introducer
                   with a peel-away sheath (for larger endoscopes). Endoscopes vary in size from 1.1 mm, for use inside a standard
                   shunt catheter, to larger endoscopes (12–14 Fr), equipped with working channels, for more complex intraventricular
                   procedures. After the ventricle is “tapped” through conventional methods, the endoscope can be inserted and the
                   ventricular anatomy identified. After the intraventricular anatomic landmarks—such as the choroid plexus and/or
                   Foramen of Monroe—are recognized, the scope can be navigated to the site of interest. Smaller endoscopes are used
                   to position the catheter in the optimal ventricular location during shunt placement or revision. Larger endoscopes
                   equipped with channels for instrumentation are used for biopsy, tumor resection, cyst aspiration, or fenestration pro-
                   cedures. Most scope systems have a separate channel for fluid irrigation if minor bleeding or debris obscure visibility.
                   Intraop complications associated with neuroendoscopic procedures include minor or major intraventricular hemor-
                   rhage; air entrapment (pneumocephalus); injury to paraventricular structures (basal ganglia, hypothalamus, brain
                   stem); cardiorespiratory depression; and delayed arousal from anesthesia. Intraventricular hemorrhage is caused by
                   direct or indirect injury to ependymal and extraependymal blood vessels. Fortunately, most bleeding encountered

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery

                               Figure 12.1-1. Endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy. The figure depicts fenestration of the
                               floor of the 3rd ventricle by a blunt probe inserted through the endoscope.

===== PAGE 1192 =====
1192   CHAPTER 12.1           Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   is minor but may be sufficient to interfere with visualization and illumination of the ventricle. Cardiorespiratory
                                   depression and cardiac arrhythmia are due, at least in part, to phenomena attributed to ↑ ICP from excessive irriga-
                                   tion without equal extracranial egress, rate of fluid instillation, and/or nonisothermic irrigant irritating the hypotha-
                                   lamic nuclei adjacent to the 3rd ventricle.
                                   Third ventriculostomy is one of the more common endoscopic procedures and refers to fenestration of the floor
                                   of the 3rd ventricle to create a communication between the 3rd ventricle and the basilar cistern (Fig. 12.1-1). The
                                   technique is most commonly applied to patients with obstructive, or noncommunicating, hydrocephalus, although
                                   broader indications are being explored. This form of hydrocephalus results from impaired CSF flow through the
                                   sylvian aqueduct or 4th ventricle outlets. For patients with noncommunicating hydrocephalus, successful 3rd ven-
                                   triculostomy allows CSF communication between the 3rd ventricle and the interpeduncular subarachnoid space,
                                   thereby alleviating the hydrocephalus and avoiding shunt placement. The fenestration is conducted first by direct
                                   visualization of the floor of the 3rd ventricle and then by perforation of the ependymal and arachnoid tissue between
                                   the mammillary bodies and the infundibular recess. The perforation can be dilated by inflation of a balloon cath-
                                   eter passed through the fenestration. Because of the proximity to the brain stem—in addition to the complications
                                   encountered with ventriculoscopy—3rd ventriculostomy carries the additional risk of mesencephalic injury, hypo-
                                   thalamic dysregulation, cranial nerve injury, and hemorrhage from the basilar artery and adjacent perforating ves-
                                   sels. Minor bleeding can be controlled easily by steady irrigation. In the event of excessive bleeding, conversion to an
                                   open craniotomy is unlikely to improve control of the hemorrhage. Patients also may be prepped for shunt insertion
                                   in the event the ventriculostomy is aborted because of unfavorable 3rd ventricular anatomy. A temporary extraven-
                                   tricular drain (EVD) may be left in place following some procedures to control CSF drainage postop and/or to allow
                                   assessment of ICP.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Obstructive hydrocephalus; shunt malfunction; loculated multicompartmental hydro-
                                   cephalus; intraventricular mass; arachnoid cyst; retained catheter

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine with head neutral; table 90° or 180°

                                    Incision                 Small frontal or parietal–occipital

                                    Special                  Endoscope (1.1–6 mm diameter); video system
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Hydrocephalus, ↑ ICP; suspicion of latex allergy in patients with spina bifida (see p. G-1).
                                      considerations         Body temperature irrigation is used.

                                    Antibiotics              Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg q 24 h iv × 2; do not combine with Ca++-containing solutions); or vanco-
                                                             mycin (10–15 mg/kg iv over 60 minutes, max 1 g.)

                                    Closing                  Monitor for delayed intraventricular or subdural hemorrhage, ventricular collapse, acute hydro-
                                      considerations         cephalus, CSF leak.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Postop care              Floor or ICU setting with cardiac and O2 sat monitoring × 24 h. Measurement of serum sodium.
                                                             Fluid intake/output recording. CT to r/o hemorrhage and to evaluate ventricular volume may be
                                                             necessary. EVD used in cases of 3rd ventriculostomy for draining CSF and testing ICP.

                                    Mortality                0–7% (most series report 0%)

                                    Morbidity                Intraventricular hemorrhage
                                                             Acute hydrocephalus
                                                             CSF leak/pneumocephalus
                                                             Meningitis/ventriculitis
                                                             Subdural effusions or hematoma
                                                             Cranial nerve palsy
                                                             Hemiparesis
                                                             Diabetes insipidus
                                                             SIADH
                                                             Temperature dysregulation

                                    Pain score               2–4

===== PAGE 1193 =====
Ventriculoscopy and Third Ventriculostomy        1193

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range            Newborn–adult

                     Male:Female          1:1

                     Incidence            3/1000 live births (congenital only)

                     Etiology             Congenital and acquired

                     Associated            Hydrocephalus; spinal dysraphism; Chiari malformation; posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus;
                       conditions         arachnoid cyst

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Ventricular shunts are inserted to ameliorate hydrocephalus or cyst formations, which are either congenital or
                   acquired. Many patients require frequent revisions of these shunts.

                    Cardiovascular         ↑ ICP →↑ BP & ↓↓ HR (Cushing’s response)
                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Neurological           The most common presenting Sx is HA. If hydrocephalus is severe, Sx of ↑ ICP (> 15 mm
                                           Hg) (e.g., N/V, drowsiness, papilledema, Sz, and focal neurological defects) develop.

                    Laboratory             Tests as indicated by H&P, CT, and/or MRI

                    Premedication          Usually not required; should be avoided in patients with ↑ ICP.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA; forced air warmer

                    Induction              If ↑ ICP, iv induction with propofol (1.5–3.5 mg/kg) is preferred, because of its ability to
                                           decrease cerebral blood volume and, hence, ICP. ETT intubation is accomplished with the
                                           use of a nondepolarizing NMB (e.g., vecuronium [0.1 mg/kg] or rocuronium [0.7–1 mg/kg]).

                    Maintenance            Isoflurane < 1% or sevoflurane < 2% inspired with N2O/O2 mixture to maintain O2 sat
                                           ~99%. Depending on duration of operation, additional doses of vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg)
                                           or rocuronium (0.2 mg/kg) may be needed. Maintain normal T in children by keeping
                                           OR warm (78°F) and using warming lights and forced air warming as needed. Ventilation
                                           is controlled mechanically (ventilator) or manually from the start of anesthesia until the

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                                           surgical wound is closed. TV and frequency are adjusted so that PetCO2 = 35–40 mm Hg.
                                           Hyperventilation and hypocarbia are undesirable because they make cannulation of the
                                           ventricle(s) more difficult for the surgeon. Maintain normotension.

                    Emergence              ETT is usually removed at the conclusion of the anesthetic after reversal. Prophylactic anti-
                                           emetic (e.g., ondansetron 0.1 mg/kg, max = 4 mg) should be given 30 min before extubation.

                    Blood and fluid        IV: 18–20 ga × 1 (22 ga for children)   Administer crystalloid (via measured volume sys-
                       requirements        NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                     tem in a child). Blood is rarely, if ever, necessary.

                    Management of          Low normal PaO2 ≥ 100                   Patients with malfunctioning VP shunts may be on
                      ICP                  Minimize fluids                         the steep portion of the intracranial compliance
                                           Isoflurane < 1% or sevoflurane < 2%     curve such that any increase in intracranial volume
                                           Hyperventilate to PaCO2 = 25–30         may ↑↑ ICP. Transient increases in ICP are tolerated,
                                           mm Hg (PetCO2 = 20–25 mm Hg)            provided that they are promptly terminated. Sustained
                                                                                   increases in ICP > 25–30 mm Hg are associated with
                                                                                   severe neurological injury and poor outcome.

===== PAGE 1194 =====
1194   CHAPTER 12.1            Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                                   Positioning                Table turned 90–180°                      Supine with a bolster under the shoulder on the
                                                              3 and pad pressure points                 operative side. The head, chest, and abdomen are
                                                              3 eyes                                    prepped for possible VP shunt insertion, so all anes-
                                                                                                        thesia equipment and lines must be at the sides of
                                                                                                        the patient.

                                   Complications              Infection                                 Major complications from this operation are
                                                              Valve malfunction                         uncommon but include infection at the valve site or
                                                                                                        in the tubing, and malfunction of the valve, either
                                                                                                        draining too little or too much CSF.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE
                                    Pain                      Children < 2 yr:                          New shunts are painful as a result of subcutaneous
                                      management              Acetaminophen suppositories (up           tunneling.
                                                              to 40 mg/kg intraop, then 10–15
                                                              mg/kg q 4 h).
                                                              Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg iv
                                                              Fentanyl 0.5–1 mcg/kg
                                                              MSO4 0.05–0.1 mg/kg

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Bouras T, Sgouros S: Complications of endoscopic third ventriculostomy: a systematic review. Acta Neurochir Suppl 2012;
                                        113:149–53.
                                     2. Kirolous RW, Javadpour M, May P, et al: Endoscopic treatment of suprasellar and third ventricle-related arachnoid cysts.
                                        Childs Nsrv Syst 2001; 17(12)713–8.
                                     3. Maldonado IL, Valery CA, Boch AL: Shunt dependence: myths and facts. Acta Neurochir (wien) 2010; 152(9):1449–54.

                                   Pediatric Brain Arteriovenous
                                   Malformations (AVM)
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Description: An arteriovenous malformation is the most common cause of nontraumatic intracranial hemorrhage
                                   in childhood. It consists of direct connections between arteries and veins without an interposed capillary network
                                   and leads to a tangle of malformed vessels and channels (the nidus), carrying blood at arterial pressure. They may
                                   occur in any location of the brain, brain stem, or spinal cord; however, cerebral malformations are the most common.
                                   The arterial vessels deliver blood to the veins at systolic blood pressure and that may cause bleeding. The lack of an
                                   interposed capillary network prevents local oxygen delivery leading to focal ischemia (steal) and seizures. This steal
                                   may result in a progressive neurologic deficit. In addition, venous congestion with arterial pressure blood may pro-
                                   duce neurologic symptoms due to venous congestion and reduced perfusion to surrounding brain. AVMs can vary in
                                   size from lesions having only one feeding vessel to very complex lesions with multiple feeders and draining veins
                                   encompassing an entire hemisphere. It is estimated that 80–90% involve the cerebral hemisphere. Most are conical
                                   in shape with the apex near the ventricle. Small AVMs are more likely to exhibit spontaneous hemorrhage, resulting
                                   in headache, neurologic deficit, coma, and rarely death. Aneurysms within the nidus of the AVM (nidal aneurysm) or
                                   involving the feeding arteries are the most likely source of bleeding. The risk of hemorrhage is reported to be 2% per
                                   year. It is reported that after a hemorrhage, the risk may be as high as 6% during the subsequent year. AVMs residing

===== PAGE 1195 =====
Pediatric Brain Arteriovenous Malformations (AVM)           1195

                   in the brain stem or cerebellum are more likely to result in permanent neurologic deficit or death if hemorrhage
                   develops compared to those in the hemispheres. Recurrent headache or new-onset seizure may herald the symptom-
                   atic AVM. However, the sudden onset of headache often followed by neurologic deficit should lead to an imaging
                   study (CT or MRI) to demonstrate the lesion. If no lesion is identified, a lumbar puncture to confirm the presence of
                   subarachnoid blood is indicated. Although CT angiography (CTA) or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is
                   very sensitive in the diagnosis of AVM, four-vessel cerebral angiography is still the gold standard to confirm the pres-
                   ence and define the anatomy of these lesions. If the initial angiogram following a hemorrhage is nondiagnostic, the
                   study should be repeated in 1–3 mo, after resolution of hematoma and local compression of the vessels in the nidus.
                   The ideal treatment of AVMs is complete surgical excision, which removes the risk of hemorrhage, decreases or
                   eliminates seizures, and may alleviate or resolve neurologic symptoms of “cerebral steal” or venous congestion. A
                   treatment decision for AVMs depends on size, location, complexity, presence of associated aneurysms, as well as
                   patient age, neurologic status, surgical expertise, and requires consideration of family and patient preference. The
                   surgeon’s decision to treat or observe a child with an AVM is complex with the ultimate goal of preservation of neu-
                   rologic function. Some lesions situated in eloquent or deep regions of the brain are best observed or considered for
                   interventional and/or stereotactic radiosurgery rather than craniotomy and resection. Angiography and emboliza-
                   tion is most often performed under general anesthesia in the radiology suite. However, operating rooms have been
                   constructed that can be used for complex angiographic procedures, open neurosurgical operations, magnetic reso-
                   nance imaging and image-guided surgery. During angiography and embolization, physiologic monitoring (sensory
                   and motor evoked potentials) is usually carried out. Careful blood pressure control is mandatory, and mild hypother-
                   mia (33°C) may be desirable. The duration of anesthesia is usually measured in hours, and postembolization the
                   children are cared for in the PICU. Frequently, multiple episodes of embolization over weeks or even months are
                   required for large or complex AVMs before the lesion is amenable to surgery or radiosurgery. However, embolization
                   as the sole treatment for AVMs is not recommended; rather it should be used as an adjunct to surgery or to decrease
                   size to successfully treat with radiosurgery. Surgery is most often performed under GA. In older teenagers with
                   lesions in eloquent cortex, especially those involving speech, awake craniotomy and direct brain mapping may be
                   used. Obtaining adequate brain relaxation may be difficult using awake techniques. For most children, GA is recom-
                   mended. The use of image guidance helps in localization of the lesion allowing for more precise placement of the
                   craniotomy flap and better localization of subcortical lesions. Intubation should be completed without the patient
                   straining or becoming hypertensive so as to decrease the risk of hemorrhage. Mild hyperventilation is begun to
                   decrease and maintain the PaCO2 to 30–35 mm Hg. A lumbar subarachnoid drain may be used to allow for brain
                   relaxation and access to deep lesions. At least two peripheral intravenous lines, an arterial line, pulse oximeter, Foley
                   catheter, and a CVP line are placed. The use of mild (33°C) or moderate hypothermia requiring central cooling may
                   be undertaken. Minimal isotonic fluids should be administered, and the serum Na+ is kept in the 140–150 mEq range.
                   If needed, hypertonic (3%) saline is administered. Mannitol and/or Lasix may be given to aid in brain relaxation if a
                   lumbar drain is not placed. The use of dexamethasone (1–2 mg/kg/d; max 16 mg/d) is controversial but is used more
                   often than not. Anticonvulsants are not routinely administered unless there is a history of seizures. Routine prophy-
                   lactic antibiotics (e.g., ceftriaxone) are given 30–60 min before the skin incision. If intraop angiography is to be used,
                   the catheter sheath is placed in the femoral artery and covered beneath a sterile dressing. The patient is carefully
                   positioned on the table, and a radiolucent headholder is applied to the skull. Evoked potential monitoring electrodes
                   are placed, and baseline potentials are established (special anesthetic techniques are required and motor paralytic

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                   agents are minimized or avoided). Image guidance is established, and the patient is draped and padded to avoid pres-
                   sure points, allow access to the femoral arterial sheath, and allow a clear line of sight to the image guidance system.
                   The skin incision is infiltrated with 1/4–1/2% bupivacaine with 1/200,000 or 1/400,000 epinephrine to minimize skin
                   bleeding. After the elevation of the bone flap, either CSF drainage via the lumbar drain or hypertonic agents are used
                   to allow for minimal brain retraction and/or manipulation during the approach and resection of the AVM. If planned
                   temporary occlusion of a major feeding vessel is required, barbiturates may be administered. Surgery may be pro-
                   longed and intraop angiography performed on multiple occasions during the procedure. MAP is maintained at the
                   preop resting levels or within a set range determined by the surgical team using SNP and other vasoactive agents. To
                   prevent perfusion pressure breakthrough and cerebral swelling, hypertension is avoided. If the procedure is pro-
                   longed, the AVM is very complex, or a subtotal or planned staged removal is the surgical outcome, then the patient
                   should remain intubated and ventilated postoperatively. Strict control of MAP is mandatory, and the range is based
                   on the patient’s age, AVM complexity, location, use of and degree of hypothermia, and preop blood pressure. Intraop
                   MRI scans are being studied at many institutions. MRI requires very careful planning to allow the patient’s head to be
                   moved or rotated into the MRI donut during the operative procedure. MRI eliminates the ability to perform evoked
                   potential monitoring. The use of this advanced technology, albeit attractive, produces a complex and hostile operating
                   room environment and increases the anesthesia workload. Its benefit for AVM surgery is as yet to be determined.

===== PAGE 1196 =====
1196   CHAPTER 12.1             Pediatric Neurosurgery

                                   Summary of Procedures: See Chapter 1, Craniotomy for Intracranial Aneurysms, p. 5.
                                   Anesthetic Considerations: See Chapter 1, Craniotomy for Intracranial Aneurysms, p. 6.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Bissonnette B, Brady KM, Easley RB: Anesthesia for neurosurgical procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds.
                                        Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th ed. Wiley-Blockwell, Oxford: 2012, 540–69.
                                     2. Bissonnette B: Cerebral protection. Pediatr Anesth 2004; 14:403–6.
                                     3. Brain Trauma Foundation, American Association of Neurological Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons: Guidelines
                                        for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. Prophylactic hypothermia. J Neurotrauma 2007; 24(Suppl1):S21–5.
                                     4. Hamilton MG, Spetzler RF: The prospective application of a grading system for arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery
                                        1994; 34(1):2–6.
                                     5. McIntyre LA, Furgeson DA, Hebert PC, et al: Prolonged therapeutic hypothermia after traumatic brain injury in adults.
                                        JAMA 2003; 289:2992–9.
                                     6. Robin PH: Arteriovenous malformations. In: Albright AL, Pollack IF, Adelson PD, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric
                                        Neurosurgery. New York, Thieme: 2008, 983–1003.
                                     7. Smyth MD, Sneed PK, Ciricillo SF, et al: Stereotactic radiosurgery for pediatric intracranial arteriovenous malformations: the
                                        University of California at San Francisco experience. J Neurosurg 2002; 97(1):48–55.
                                     8. Vavilala MS, Soriano SG: Anesthesia for neurosurgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for
                                        Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 713–45.
        Pediatric Surgery

===== PAGE 1197 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.2 Pediatric
                                           Ophthalmic
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           D. M. Alcorn, MD
                                           Natalia F. Callaway, MD
                                           Darius M. Moshfeghi, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Julie Williamson, DO, FAAP

===== PAGE 1198 =====
Strabismus Surgery
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Surgical correction of strabismus is a common procedure in ophthalmic practice, as strabismus
                                   occurs in 3–5% of the general population. Strabismus surgery is the most common pediatric eye surgery performed.
                                   The goal of this procedure is to correct the ocular misalignment caused by this condition. This can be achieved
                                   by several methods: (a) weakening the muscles (either by recession, marginal myotomy, or inserting a spacer);
                                   (b) strengthening the muscles, by shortening their length (resection), moving the muscle’s insertion toward the lim-
                                   bus (advancement), or tightening the muscle’s fibers (plication or tuck); or (c) by transposing the muscles. Surgery
                                   can be performed on any of the four recti muscles (medial rectus, lateral rectus, superior rectus, and/or lateral rectus
                                   muscle) or the two oblique muscles (superior oblique and inferior oblique).
                                   There are many indications for strabismus surgery. These include maintaining and restoring binocular vision,
                                   improvement in diplopia, improvement of anomalous eye movements, locating and/or transposition surgery for
                                   lost muscle, improvement in asthenopic symptoms, improvement in anomalous/altered head posture, dampening of
                                   nystagmus, and improvement in psychosocial function.
                                   Often, forced duction testing (FDT) is performed during surgery to determine if there is evidence of limited duc-
                                   tions. This helps to differentiate a paretic muscle vs. a restriction that may limit motility. The eyes should be immobile
                                   during FDT as well as during surgery. If succinylcholine has been used, at least 20 min should pass before performing
                                   duction testing because succinylcholine causes contraction of extraocular muscles. Alternatively, a different muscle
                                   relaxant may be used.
                                   Eye position under GA is well documented: the eyes will become more divergent, and this tendency is increased
                                   in misaligned eyes; therefore, exotropic eyes appear more outwardly deviated, and esotropic (inward deviation)
                                   eyes actually appear straighter (less esotropic). Hence, it is important that the surgeon have solid measurements
                                   preoperatively.
                                   The surgery usually is performed through one of two possible approaches. The limbal incision is made at the junc-
                                   tion of the cornea and the conjunctiva, with radial relaxing incisions in the quadrants on either side of the muscle.
                                   The other is a fornix or cul-de-sac incision, which is made ~4–8 mm from the limbus in the quadrant adjacent to
                                   the muscle on which to operate. This approach is subposterior to tenon’s capsule. Comfort and cosmesis immediately
                                   postop are superior with the fornix incision.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: In very cooperative older children, an adjustable suture technique may be
                                   used. Unlike fixed sutures, the adjustable suture technique allows modification of the position of the muscle. An
                                   adjustable suture involves temporarily positioning the muscle, but not finally tying it down until the patient is awake
                                   and has been remeasured. After the patient is free of the effects of anesthesia, measurements are retaken, and the
                                   muscle is placed in its optimum position, to properly align the eyes, and then securely tied down. This adjustment
                                   may be performed the same day of surgery or the following day. Adjustable strabismus surgery ideally reduces the
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   frequency of reoperations by eliminating undesirable early postop undercorrections or overcorrections and increases
                                   the rate of surgical success.
                                   Although GA is most commonly used, strabismus surgery may be done using a retrobulbar, peribulbar, subtenon,
                                   or subconjunctival block, or even topical anesthesia. Both topical and peribulbar anesthesia have the advantage
                                   of providing good akinesia and anesthesia but without the risks associated with a retrobulbar injection (e.g., hemor-
                                   rhage, optic nerve damage, ocular perforation). When using topical anesthesia, this may be augmented by the use of
                                   minimal sedation and/or antianxiety medications.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Strabismus

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine (turned 180°)

                                    Incision                Limbal or fornix

                                    Antibiotics             Topical and/or conjunctival by surgeon

                            1198

===== PAGE 1199 =====
Strabismus Surgery      1199

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Unique                Avoid neuromuscular blockade for forced duction test. Succinylcholine will compromise forced
                       considerations      duction test for 15–20 min after administration. A stable deep plane of anesthesia will keep eyes
                                           from moving or being disconjugate. Incidence of PONV is 45–85% without prophylaxis. Topical
                                           tetracaine may ↓ postop pain. Oculocardiac reflex may cause ↓↓ HR. Hypercarbia, light anesthe-
                                           sia, and remifentanil may increase incidence of OCR.

                     Surgical time         20–90 min, dependent on procedure and number of involved muscles. Some surgeons use preop
                                           antibiotic eye drops (day of surgery, at time of surgery) or use of topical 5% povidone iodine
                                           solution in conjunctival fornices with surgical prep. Timing of antibiotic administration may add to
                                           surgical time.

                     EBL                   Minimal

                     Mortality             Rare

                     Morbidity             Failure to achieve ocular alignment
                                           Infection
                                           Hemorrhage
                                           Anterior segment ischemia
                                           Dissatisfaction with cosmetic result

                     Postop care           PACU with discharge home within hours. Typically eye patches not required but varies by surgical
                                           preference. Some children may need “no-nos” or arm restraints. High incidence of emergence
                                           delirium. Topical tetrocaine, one drop at beginning of case, and one drop at end has been shown
                                           to ↓ postop pain.
                                           Postop issues: All patients respond differently to the strabismus surgery. Some may be drowsy or
                                           have PONV. Pain is usually mild and responds to acetaminophen. Many physicians avoid NSAIDs
                                           due to potential bleeding. Children may be frightened to open their eyes, but generally this
                                           improves within a few days.

                     Pain score            2–4 (moderate)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Children

                     Male:Female           1:1

                     Incidence             3–5% of general population

                     Etiology              Generally idiopathic; muscle palsies may be associated with trauma, inflammation, tumors, and/
                                           or ischemia; restrictive strabismus may occur with thyroid disease (Graves’ disease), fibrosis syn-
                                           dromes, or to a scleral buckle or mass.

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                     Associated            ↑ incidence in premature infants, small-for-gestational-age infants, those with a positive family
                       conditions          history of strabismus, craniosynostosis syndromes, or associated craniofacial syndromes (Apert,
                                           Crouzon, Pfeiffer, etc.), trisomy 21, fetal alcohol syndrome, CNS disease affecting ocular mus-
                                           cles or nerves. No longer considered an independent risk factor for malignant hyperthermia.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Strabismus is the most frequent ophthalmic condition in children requiring surgical repair. Most children will be
                   healthy, but the association of strabismus with cerebral palsy, prematurity, and craniofacial and neurological disorders
                   requires careful preop evaluation. Unlike adult eye surgeries that often are performed using retrobulbar or peribul-
                   bar blocks, in children GETA is required to achieve successful operative conditions. For the anesthesiologist there are
                   three key perioperative problems associated with strabismus surgery: the oculocardiac reflex (OCR), an extremely high
                   incidence of PONV in the untreated patient (45–85%), and a high incidence of emergence delirium (10–80%). At one
                   time, it was believed that children undergoing strabismus surgery were at increased risk for malignant hyperthermia.

===== PAGE 1200 =====
1200   CHAPTER 12.2            Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery

                                   Although this has been shown to be inaccurate, many neuromuscular syndromes are associated with musculoskeletal
                                   abnormalities including strabismus and ptosis. A thorough family history of anesthetic problems must be obtained. The
                                   surgeon may plan to execute a forced duction test (FDT) in which the eye is grasped at the limbus causing a slight pro-
                                   ptosis and moved into each field of gaze to determine if the strabismus is the result of paresis or restrictive extraocular
                                   muscles. Succinylcholine compromises the test by causing tonic contractions of the extraocular muscles for 15–20 min
                                   after administration, so it is avoided when possible. Neuromuscular blockade will also confuse the results of the FDT.
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, LMA

                                    Induction                  Following standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1) the anesthesiologist should have avail-
                                                               able a vagolytic agent (atropine or glycopyrrolate 0.01–0.02 mg/kg) to attenuate the OCR.
                                                               Sevoflurane maintenance is associated with diminished OCR compared to propofol and
                                                               remifentanil. FDT may be performed prior to the administration of NMB. Rocuronium
                                                               (0.6 mg/kg) may be used to facilitate endotracheal intubation. An oral RAE tube or flexible
                                                               LMA secured to the mandible will keep the airway away from the surgical field.

                                    Maintenance                May use inhalation anesthetic or TIVA. Avoid N2O as this is a highly emetogenic sur-
                                                               gery. Propofol infusion (150–200 mcg/kg/min) may require NMB or augmentation with
                                                               remifentanil to maintain a motionless patient (be aware that remifentanil may increase
                                                               OCR). Postop analgesia should be multimodal to minimize opioids (due to high risk of
                                                               PONV). Acetaminophen (30–40 mg/kg PR or 10 mg/kg iv) and a short-acting opioid
                                                               (fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg iv) should be used. Combination therapy for PONV prevention is
                                                               most effective. Ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg up to 4 mg) plus dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg
                                                               up to 5 mg) is preferred. “Super” hydration with 30 mL/kg of crystalloid has also been
                                                               shown to ↓ PONV. Children exhibiting OCR are more likely to have PONV.

                                    Emergence                  The surgeon may request “deep extubation.” In this case, the anesthetic (sevoflurane or
                                                               TIVA) is increased until the patient has no response to airway manipulation such as suc-
                                                               tioning but has steady spontaneous ventilation. The ETT or LMA is removed and an oral
                                                               airway placed. The patient is allowed to awaken with no further stimulation, monitoring
                                                               carefully for signs of laryngospasm.

                                    Blood and fluid            Peripheral iv: 22–20 g
                                       requirements            Crystalloid to replace calculated deficit plus maintenance during care.
                                                               Hydration with 30 mL/kg has been shown to reduce PONV.

                                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1). Temperature.

                                    Positioning                Supine ± shoulder roll. Head of bed usually rotated 180° away.

                                    Complications              Oculocardiac                    Traction on the extraocular muscles or the levator, or
                                                               reflex                          external pressure to the globe, initiates a trigeminal
                                                                                               reflex via parasympathetic output from the vagus nerve.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                               This may cause bradyarrhythmias, AV block, ventricular
                                                                                               ectopy, or even asystole. May be attenuated by pretreat-
                                                                                               ment with anticholinergics (see above). Tends to extin-
                                                                                               guish with repeated manipulation. Treat by removing
                                                                                               pressure to globe or tension on the extraocular muscle
                                                                                               and administer atropine or glycopyrrolate. Rarely may
                                                                                               require epinephrine (1–10 mcg/kg). The oculorespiratory
                                                                                               reflex (ORR) is a less well-understood response to trigem-
                                                                                               inal nerve stimulus that results in cessation of spontane-
                                                                                               ous ventilation and should be considered if spontaneous
                                                                                               ventilation via LMA is the preferred technique.
                                                               Accidental                      May result from surgical repositioning or removal of
                                                               extubation                      drapes. The ETT/LMA should be firmly secured, and the
                                                                                               anesthesiogist should be attentive in changes to position-
                                                                                               ing (e.g., moving from one eye to the other) and removal
                                                                                               of drapes.

===== PAGE 1201 =====
Pediatric Vitreoretinal Surgery         1201

                    Complications               Emergence delirium                 Dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 mcg/kg iv over 10 min) or
                      (cont’d)                                                     clonidine (1–2 mcg/kg iv) decrease emergence delirium
                                                                                   and may increase parental satisfaction. Dexmedetomi-
                                                                                   dine plus ketamine (1–3 mg/kg/h) decrease emergence
                                                                                   delirium, the OCR, pain, and need for postop analgesia in
                                                                                   one study. The sub-Tenon block, usually performed by the
                                                                                   surgeon, also may decrease emergence delirium.

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications               PONV                               Even with prophylaxis, up to 10% experience PONV. Res-
                                                                                   cue antiemetic therapy: ondansetron 0.01 mg/kg up to
                                                                                   4 mg; metoclopramide 0.1 mg/kg up to 10 mg; prometha-
                                                                                   zine (> 2 yr old) 0.25–1 mg/kg PO/PR/im/iv up to 25 mg).
                                                Emergence delirium                 May be decreased with use of alpha-agonists dexme-
                                                                                   detomidine or clonidine (see above). At emergence or in
                                                                                   the PACU, treat with opioid analgesia (fentanyl 0.2–0.5
                                                                                   mcg/kg iv) or propofol (1 mg/kg iv).

                    Pain management             Continue acetaminophen 10 mg/kg PO Q 4 h. May require additional opioids in PACU.
                                                Intraop NSAIDS are typically avoided due to concern for local bleeding, but may be
                                                discussed with surgeon for postop analgesia.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Anninger W, Forbes B, Quinn G, et al: The effect of topical tetracaine eye drops on emergence behavior and pain relief after
                        strabismus surgery. J AAPOS 2007; 11(3):273–6.
                     2. Aouad M, Yazbeck-Karam V, Nasr V, et al: A single dose of propofol at the end of surgery for prevention of emergence
                        agitation in children undergoing strabismus surgery during sevoflurane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2007; 107:733–8.
                     3. Goodarzi M, Matar MM, Shafa M, et al: A prospective randomized blinded study of the effect of intravenous fluid therapy
                        on postoperative nausea and vomiting in children undergoing strabismus surgery. Pediatric Anesthesia 2006; 16(1):49–53.
                     4. Hahnenkamp K, Honeman C, Fischer L, et al: Effect of different anesthetics on the oculocardiac reflex during pediatric
                        strabismus surgery. Pediatric Anesth 2000; 10:601–8.
                     5. Keaney A, Diviney D, Harte S, et al: Postoperative behavioral changes following anesthesia with sevoflurane. Pediatric Anesth
                        2004; 14(10):866–70.
                     6. Madan R, Bhatia A, Chakithandy S, et al: Prophylactic dexamethasone for postoperative nausea and vomiting in pediatric
                        strabismus surgery: dose ranging and safety evaluation study. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:1622–6.
                     7. Min S-W, Hwang J-M: The incidence of asystole in patients undergoing strabismus surgery. Eye 2009; 23:864–6.
                     8. Mizrak A, Erbagci I, Arici T, et al: Dexmedetomidine use during strabismus surgery in agitated children. Med Princ Pract
                        2011; 20:427–32.
                     9. Seo I-S, Seong C-R, Jung G, et al: The effect of sub-Tenon lidocaine injection on emergence agitation after general anesthesia

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                        in pediatric strabismus surgery. Eur J Anesthesiol 2011; 28:334–9.

                   Pediatric Vitreoretinal Surgery
                         OVERVIEW
                   The majority of pediatric vitreoretinal surgery requires GA for children 18 yr and younger. As with any surgery, preop
                   education of the common risks must be discussed with the family and understood by all members of the patient care
                   team. Initial ophthalmic examination can be performed with simple sedation, using mask blow-by, with conversion
                   to GETA should the exam demonstrate pathology requiring intervention. If the patient is a mature, cooperative ado-
                   lescent (without claustrophobia) undergoing longer laser procedures (e.g., panretinal photocoagulation) or a non-
                   complex vitrectomy (e.g., nonclearing vitreous hemorrhage), then MAC with a retrobulbar block may be considered.

===== PAGE 1202 =====
1202   CHAPTER 12.2           Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery

                                   The surgeon uses a 25-gauge 1.5-inch needle on a 10-mL syringe containing a 1:1 ratio of 0.75% bupivacaine with
                                   epinephrine and 4% lidocaine. The needle is introduced along the inferior orbital rim 1/3 of the way from the lateral
                                   orbital rim, aspirated to ensure proper placement, and then the anesthetic is administered at the appropriate quantity
                                   for the patient age, weight, and gender (usually ~5 mL).
                                   Communication and teamwork are essential to optimize the surgical experience for all. Discussion should focus on:
                                   (1) what the surgical requirements are for the procedure, (2) the best anesthetic approach tailored to the patient and
                                   procedure, and (3) alternative situations and complications that may require conversion to GA. The anesthesia team
                                   often has a better understanding of what the child may tolerate, but to make informed decisions in the OR, they must
                                   understand the surgical procedure and potential complications. These are discussed below.

                                   LASER PHOTOCOAGULATION
                                   Background: Laser photocoagulation is a safe prophylactic and treatment modality for a variety of retinal and
                                   choroidal abnormalities. In the pediatric population, laser photocoagulation has success with respect to improving
                                   vision outcomes and optimizing vision potential when used for the treatment of severe retinopathy of prematurity
                                   (ROP), retinal tear and detachment, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, incontinentia pigmenti, and other, rarer,
                                   retinal vascular disorders. Laser photocoagulation may be performed in conjunction with other vitreoretinal proce-
                                   dures, such as vitrectomy (described in laser section), intravitreal injection, and fluorescein angiography.
                                   Procedure: Laser photocoagulation takes advantage of the spatial precision offered by collimated light energy
                                   to selectively (to the level of cells) ablate pathologic tissues—usually retina. When the laser is targeted at an ocular
                                   structure, the tissue absorbs the light energy and generates heat, and the surgeon can photocoagulate the aberrant
                                   tissue while minimally damaging other structures.
                                   The surgeon uses an indirect ophthalmoscope with a condensing lens to treat the fundus. The time and extent of ir-
                                   radiation varies by indication—ranging from 5 min for repair of a monocular retinal tear to an hour per eye, treated
                                   for severe ROP. Other pathologies usually fall between these two timelines, for example, a scattered panretinal pho-
                                   tocoagulation (PRP) can take 20–60 min for one or both eyes. Two procedures commonly accompany laser photoco-
                                   agulation: intravitreal injection and fluorescein angiography.
                                   Intravitreal injection of steroids or anti-VEGF medications is performed by opening the eyelid with a speculum,
                                   thoroughly sterilizing the injection area with povidone-iodine, locating the limbus and determining the injection
                                   location with calipers (varies by age, 1–4 mm from limbus), and then injecting the required medication into the
                                   vitreous substance. This is most often performed for vascular proliferative retinopathy secondary to retina ischemia.
                                   Fluorescein angiography may be used to identify ischemic areas of retina for panretinal or scattered photocoagula-
                                   tion. Intravenous injection of fluorescein carries the dye to the retina and choroidal circulation within seconds, and
                                   thus, the ophthalmologist can visualize perfusion of the choroids and retina over the next 5–15 min. The anesthesi-
                                   ologist is usually asked to perform the iv fluorescein push while the retina physician operates the camera.
                                   The potential complications for laser photocoagulation include inadvertent irradiation of other, usually more
                                   anterior, ocular structures such as the cornea, iris, lens, and so on. In addition, choroidal effusions, cataract, new
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   retinal tears, hemorrhage, anterior segment ischemia, and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) tears can complicate
                                   the procedure. Optimizing the laser delivery (intensity, duration, and exposure), distributing the treatment over
                                   multiple sessions, and continually reassessing the patient’s status minimizes the occurrence of adverse events.
                                   When complications do occur, early intervention can often prevent or minimize the long-term consequences
                                   in visual outcomes; therefore, it is critical for the entire operating team to vigilantly watch for early signs of
                                   complications.

                                   VITRECTOMY IN PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
                                   Background: Vitrectomy is usually performed to clear the visual axis or reattach the retina with the goal to restore
                                   the highest vision potential. The procedure removes the vitreous gel in the eye. In children, vitrectomy is indicated
                                   for a variety of vitreoretinal conditions, but most commonly severe retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), partial or
                                   complete retinal detachments, nonaccidental trauma, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, genetic conditions
                                   affecting the retina, and malignancy.
                                   Vitrectomy in a child under 1 yr of age is the most difficult and least forgiving surgery in ophthalmology. The infant
                                   needs to have GETA, with paralysis, and no movement of the bed/table is permissible. The surgery can last from

===== PAGE 1203 =====
Pediatric Vitreoretinal Surgery      1203

                   45 to 75 min. In older children with complex retinal detachments, typically the procedure takes from 45 to 75 min.
                   From an anesthesia perspective, it is imperative that the child awakens without coughing or bucking.
                   Traumatic and/or rhegmatogenous retinal detachment cases, usually in older children, are often accompanied by a
                   scleral buckle procedure, which involves isolating and manipulating the four recti muscles. This ocular manipula-
                   tion can induce extreme bradycardia or asystole from the OCR and can be associated with significant postop pain
                   that must be adequately controlled. A scleral buckle typically adds 30–45 min to a case duration.
                   Procedure: After ensuring the eye is fully anesthetized and sterilized, the ophthalmologist creates a three-point
                   sclerotomy with 23- or 25-gauge incisions through the pars plana, which is located 3–4 mm from the limbus (in a
                   child greater than 2 yr; in younger children, pars plicata incisions may be made 1 mm posterior to the limbus), at the
                   inferotemporal, superonasal, and supertemporal locations. At the inferotemporal post an infusion cannula main-
                   tains the pressure of the eye by allowing saline to replace the excised tissue. The other two ports are then used for the
                   instrumentation necessary to perform a bimanual vitrectomy (see Fig. 12.2-1). One of these instruments has a light
                   attached to maintain visualization of the retina throughout the procedure. The surgical microscope and a wide-angle
                   viewing system are used to perform the operation. To remove the actual vitreous substance, the posterior hyaloid
                   is carefully elevated and cut with a microvitrectomy hand piece that simultaneously aspirates vitreous components.
                   The core vitrectomy is then performed for all 360° of the globe, utilizing all surgical ports as necessary. Silicone oil

                                  A

                                   Infusion cannula

                                                                                                           Vitreous
                                       Fiberoptic light
                                                                                                           cutter/Aspirator

                                  B
                                                                                                           Infusion cannula

                                                                                                           Pars plana
                                                                                                           region of eye

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                                           Vitreous
                                                                                                           cutter/Aspirator
                                   Fiberoptic light

                               Figure 12.2-1. Vitrectomy procedure. A: Ophthalmologist’s view. B: Cross-sectional
                               view showing removal of vitreous in progress.

===== PAGE 1204 =====
1204   CHAPTER 12.2           Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery

                                   may be slowly infused into the posterior portion of the eye to replace the removed vitreous. Ports are sequentially
                                   closed. A subconjuctival injection of an antibiotic (usually cefazolin) and steroid (decadron) is then administered.
                                   Complications of vitrectomy include corneal edema, retinal detachment, ↑ IOP (exacerbated when patient has pre-
                                   existing glaucoma), hyptony (↓ IOP), endophthalmitis (infection), and intraocular hemorrhage. Due to their high
                                   regenerative capacity, children have robust scarring responses that create vision-threatening proliferative vitreoreti-
                                   nopathy (PVR) requiring a return to the OR, usually 6–12 wk after the initial surgery. If proliferative vitreoretinopa-
                                   thy develops and a scleral buckle is not present, then one will be placed in older children (> 1 yr). Otherwise, if a
                                   buckle is present, a complex vitrectomy with possible diathermy, lens removal, iridectomy, retinectomy, perfluoron,
                                   laser, and silicone oil may be needed. This procedure can take 45–75 min. If silicone is placed, it must be removed
                                   6 wk to 6 mo later in a vitrectomy, with possible membrane peel in a 30–45 min procedure, to minimize the risk of
                                   vision loss and optimize the child’s long-term vision potential.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (vitrectomy and other open globe procedures)
                                    Position               Supine (turned 180° degrees)

                                    Incision               Pars plana or pars plicata

                                    Antibiotics            Subconjunctival

                                    Unique                 A stable deep plane of anesthesia will keep eyes from moving or being disconjugate during initial
                                      considerations       exam, often done under mask anesthesia. Vitrectomy for infants and open globe emergencies
                                                           require neuromuscular blockade with GETA and emergence without coughing or bucking. OCR
                                                           may cause profound bradycardia. Intraocular gas placement (sulfur hexafluoride) or an open
                                                           globe precludes the use of nitrous oxide. Silicone oil may be injected into the posterior eye to
                                                           replace vitreous humor. Subconjunctival injection of steroids at the end of procedure is painful.
                                                           Patients are often premature infants at high risk for postanesthetic apnea.

                                    Surgical time          45–75 min for vitrectomy. Scleral buckle adds 30–45 min.

                                    EBL                    Minimal

                                    Mortality              Rare

                                    Morbidity              Infection, hemorrhage, retinal tear or detachment, corneal edema, cataract

                                    Postop care            For outpatients, PACU with discharge to home or inpatient floor within hours. Eye patches may be
                                                           required. Some children may need arm restraints. Ex-premature neonates and infants may need
                                                           inpatient monitoring for apnea. NICU babies may have procedure performed at bedside. They may
                                                           also require postop controlled ventilation.

                                    Pain score             Moderate to severe (scleral buckle)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              For vitreoretinal surgery, cataracts, and glaucoma: premature newborns, infants.
                                                           Eye injuries: any age, but most common in 10–30 yr old.

                                    Male:Female            1:1 for complications of prematurity
                                                           4:1 for penetrating eye injuries

                                    Incidence              ROP occurs in > 50% of ELBW babies (< 1500 g)
                                                           Injury occurs ~1 in 100, ages 0–19 yr

                                    Etiology               Retinopathy of prematurity, accidental or nonaccidental trauma, malignancy

                                    Associated             Prematurity, Down syndrome (trisomy 21), Alport syndrome, Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syn-
                                    conditions             dromes, homocystinuria, mucopolysaccharidoses, craniofacial syndromes and phakmatoses
                                                           (neurofibromatosis, Sturge-Weber syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, incontinentia pigmenti, and
                                                            ataxia telangiactasia).

===== PAGE 1205 =====
Pediatric Vitreoretinal Surgery     1205

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Vitreoretinal and open globe surgery in pediatrics may involve special high-risk populations—infants, often prema-
                   ture, and trauma patients. Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a leading cause of blindness worldwide, related to
                   abnormal retinal vascular development and correlated to low birth weight and prematurity. In the United States, all
                   infants with a gestational age ≤ 30 wk or birth weight < 1500 g are screened for ROP starting at postnatal age 4–6 wk.
                   Laser therapy is instituted based on the area and severity of retinal vascular proliferation in an attempt to prevent
                   loss of visual acuity or retinal detachment. The ETROP trial demonstrated improved outcomes with early treatments.
                   Vision-saving surgery for infants with ROP, congenital cataracts, or glaucoma may require surgical intervention while
                   still extremely small (< 1000 g) with significant systemic comorbidities including intraventricular hemorrhage, pulmo-
                   nary hypertension, congenital heart disease, and acute or chronic pulmonary disease. These infants are at higher risk
                   for perioperative complications than are older children. Perioperative apnea is common in infants below 52–60 wk
                   postconceptual age. Even in the infant requiring no supplemental oxygen preop, controlled ventilation may be neces-
                   sary even after minor surgical intervention. For term or older infants presenting from home, postop inpatient apnea
                   monitoring is recommended prior to 48 wk postgestational age. For infants with comorbidity or prematurity, consider
                   inpatient admission for those less than 52–60 wk postgestational age.
                   An initial examination under anesthesia is often performed to determine the need for surgical intervention. Mask
                   anesthesia can allow for an excellent exam with attention to obtaining a deep enough plane for the eyes to return
                   to midline rather than “sundowning” or being disconjugate. Even small premature infants may tolerate a brief exam
                   using mask ventilation. If the exam reveals need for further intervention, intravenous access can then be obtained
                   and the trachea intubated. Having a motionless field is essential for vitreoretinal surgery. GETA with neuromuscular
                   blockade provides a motionless field without requiring a depth of anesthesia that may cause hypotension leading to
                   compromise in retinal artery perfusion and ocular ischemia. Very premature or small infants or those with neuro-
                   logic disease such as hydrocephalus or significant intraventricular hemorrhage may require controlled ventilation for
                   even a brief exam under anesthesia.
                   Children with craniofacial syndromes and mucopolysaccharidoses should have careful airway evaluations and are
                   expected to present with challenging airways. Alport syndrome is associated with renal failure and development of
                   myopathy that may preclude the safe use of succinylcholine. Trisomy 21 and Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes
                   are associated with structural (especially valvular) heart disease. The phakomatoses may have neurologic involve-
                   ment and seizures as part of the presentation.
                   Open globe injury presents a different, but also challenging, patient population. In the case of trauma, other
                   life-threatening injuries must be ruled out. Risk of aspiration of gastric contents must be weighed against vision-
                   threatening increases in intraocular pressure (IOP) that may occur during induction with resulting extrusion of
                   intraocular contents including the iris, lens, and vitreous. Painful eye injuries may cause crying and rubbing of
                   the eyes that ↑ IOP. Placement of an intravenous line to accomplish a rapid sequence induction may itself cause
                   screaming and crying that may significantly and dangerously ↑ IOP. Oral benzodiazepine premedication (mid-
                   azolam 0.5 mg/kg) may be given to calm the child and facilitate intravenous access. In the absence of an intra-

                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                   venous line, inhalational induction (avoiding contact of the mask on the eye) or intramuscular ketamine (with
                   or without succinylcholine or rocuronium) may be considered, balanced against the risk of aspiration of gastric
                   contents. Succinylcholine causes a transient mild ↑ IOP (7–12 mm Hg for 5–6 min, in contrast to coughing which
                   is believed to explosively increase IOP to 40 mm Hg or more). A deep plane of anesthesia does not reliably attenu-
                   ate the succinylcholine-induced ↑ IOP. “High dose” rocuronium (1.2 mg/kg) takes longer to achieve neuromus-
                   cular blockade but is not associated with ↑ IOP. Etomidate and propofol in combination with lidocaine (1 mg/kg
                   iv) and/or fentanyl should be used to achieve a deep plane of anesthesia prior to laryngoscopy. If necessary, the
                   surgeon can physically shield the eye to contain contents during induction. The same attention to stability of IOP
                   is needed at the time of extubation.
                   Once the trachea is intubated, the ETT and circuit should be secured to be away from the surgical field and still
                   accessible by the anesthesiologist. Maintenance may be inhalational or intravenous agents, planning for a smooth
                   transition to spontaneous ventilation and extubation at the end of the case when appropriate. The oculocardiac reflex
                   (OCR) may occur with manipulation of the eye (please see the section on strabismus surgery for more on the OCR).
                   Prior to extubation, gastric contents should be aspirated by suction catheter and prophylaxis for PONV and adequate
                   analgesia given to ensure a smooth emergence.

===== PAGE 1206 =====
1206   CHAPTER 12.2          Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery

                                               Ocular muscle        Long ciliary
                                                                      nerve

                                                                              Short ciliary
                                                                                nerves
                                           Stimulation
                                                                                                                  Ophttha
                                                                                                                  Ophthalmic                            se
                                                                                                                                                  Main sensory
                                                                                                                   bra
                                                                                                                     anch V
                                                                                                                   branch                           nucle of
                                                                                                                                                    nucleus
                                                                             Afferent pathway
                                                                                         hw
                                                                                         hway
                                                                                          way
                                                                                                                                                trigem
                                                                                                                                                     mina nerve
                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                trigeminal

                                                                                                                                                  Moo nucleus
                                                                                                                                                  Motor
                                                                         Ciliary                                                                     v
                                                                                                                                                  of vagus nerve
                                                                        ganglion

                                                                                                                  Gasserian
                                                                                                                  Gasseeria
                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                 (trigeminal)
                                                                                                                 (trigem
                                                                                                                       mina
                                                                                                                          al)
                                                                                                                   ganglion

                                                                                                                             ve
                                                                                                                         ner
                                                                                                                  s s or
                                                                                                                e          ay
                                                                                                             epr athw
                                                                                                     i a cd       t p             Xth cranial
                                                                                                 r d            n
                                                                                              Ca            ere
                                                                                                         Eff                        nerve

                                                     Figure 12.2-2. Anatomy and physiology of the oculocardiac reflex.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE

                                   Induction                   Following standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1), the surgeon may perform an exam
                                                               under anesthesia. Conversion to GETA may then be required.
                                                               The anesthesiologist may give vagolytic agent (atropine or glycopyrrolate 0.01–1.02
                                                               mg/kg) to attenuate the OCR. Sevoflurane maintenance diminishes the OCR compared
                                                               to propofol and remifentanil. Forced duction test (FDT) may be preformed prior to the
                                                               administration of NMB. Rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg) may be used to facilitate endotracheal
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                               intubation. An oral RAE tube or flexible LMA secured to the mandible will keep the
                                                               airway away from the surgical field.

                                   Maintenance                 May use either inhalational anesthetic or TIVA. Many avoid N2O, as this is highly
                                                               emetogenic surgery. N2O should be avoided if sulfur hexafluoride or carbon octoflou-
                                                               rine will be used or has been used in the past 6 wk. Propofol infusion (150–200 mcg/
                                                               kg/min) may require NMB or augmentation with remifentanil to maintain a motion-
                                                               less patient (be aware remifentanil may ↑ OCR). Multimodal analgesia may decrease
                                                               opioid use and risk of PONV. Acetaminophen (30–40 mg/kg PR or 10 mg/kg iv) and
                                                               short-acting opioid (fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg iv) should be used. Combination prophylactic
                                                               therapy for PONV prevention is most effective. Ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg up to 4 mg)
                                                               plus dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg up to 5 mg) is preferred. “Super” hydration with 30
                                                               mL/kg of crystalloid has also been shown to decrease PONV. Children exhibiting the
                                                               OCR are more likely to have PONV.

                                   Emergence                   The surgeon may request “deep extubation.” In this case, the anesthetic (sevoflurane or
                                                               TIVA) is increased until the patient has no response to airway manipulation such as

===== PAGE 1207 =====
Pediatric Vitreoretinal Surgery    1207

                    Emergence          suctioning but maintains steady spontaneous ventilation. The ETT or LMA is removed
                      (cont’d)         and an oral airway may be placed. The patient is allowed to awaken with no further
                                       stimulation, monitoring carefully for signs of laryngospasm.

                    Blood and fluid    Peripheral iv: 20–22 g                           Crystalloid to replace calculated deficit
                       requirements                                                     plus maintenance during case. Con-
                                                                                        sider augmented hydration with 30 mL/
                                                                                        kg crystalloid to reduce PONV if pul-
                                                                                        monary edema (i.e., extreme prematu-
                                                                                        rity) is not a risk.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                       Temperature, especially for premature infants.
                                       TOF.

                    Positioning        Supine or supine with shoulder roll.
                                       Head of bed usually rotated 180° away.

                    Complications      Oculocardiac reflex (OCR) (see Fig. 12.2-2)      Traction on the extraocular muscles or
                                                                                        the levator, or external pressure to the
                                                                                        globe, initiates an afferent trigeminal
                                                                                        nerve signal evoking parasympathetic
                                                                                        output from the vagus nerve. This may
                                                                                        cause bradyarrhythmias, AV block, ven-
                                                                                        tricular ectopy or even asystole. May
                                                                                        be attenuated by pretreatment with
                                                                                        anticholinergics (see above). Tends to
                                                                                        extinguish with repeated manipulation.
                                                                                        Treat by removing pressure to globe
                                                                                        or tension on the extraocular muscle
                                                                                        and administer atropine or glycopyr-
                                                                                        rolate. Rarely may require epinephrine
                                                                                        1–10 mcg/kg. The oculorespiratory
                                                                                        reflex (ORR) is a less well-understood
                                                                                        response to trigeminal stimulus that
                                                                                        results in cessation of spontaneous ven-
                                                                                        tilation and should be accounted for if
                                                                                        spontaneous ventilation via LMA is the
                                                                                        preferred technique.
                                       Systemic effect of topical ophthalmic            See Table 12.2-1.
                                       agents                                           May result from surgical repositioning or
                                       Accidental extubation                            removal of drapes. The ETT/LMA should

                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                        be firmly secured, and the anesthesi-
                                                                                        ologist should be attentive to changes in
                                                                                        positioning (e.g., moving from one eye to
                                                                                        the other) and removal of drapes.
                                                                                        Consider lidocaine 1 mg/kg iv 3 min
                                       Coughing or bucking on emergence                 prior to extubation. Dexmedetomidine
                                                                                        (0.5–1 mcg/kg iv over 10 min) or cloni-
                                                                                        dine (1–2 mcg/kg iv) decrease emer-
                                                                                        gence delirium and may increase paren-
                                                                                        tal satisfaction. Dexmedetomidine plus
                                                                                        ketamine (1–3 mg/kg/h) decreased
                                                                                        emergence delirium, the OCR, pain,
                                                                                        and postop analgesia requirement in
                                                                                        one study. The sub-Tenon block (pre-
                                                                                        formed by surgeon) may also decrease
                                                                                        emergence delirium.

===== PAGE 1208 =====
1208   CHAPTER 12.2                Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE
                                   Complications                    Emergence delirium                                                  Dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 mcg/kg iv
                                                                                                                                        over 10 min) or clonidine (1–2 mcg/
                                                                                                                                        kg iv) decrease emergence delirium
                                                                                                                                        and may increase parental satisfaction.
                                                                                                                                        Dexmedetomidine plus ketamine (1–3
                                                                                                                                        mg/kg/h) decreased emergence delir-
                                                                                                                                        ium, the OCR, pain, and postop analge-
                                                                                                                                        sia requirement in one study. The sub-
                                                                                                                                        Tenon block (performed by surgeon)
                                                                                                                                        also may decrease emergence delirium.
                                                                                                                                        Many patients undergoing vitreo-
                                                                    Postop apnea                                                        retinal surgery are ex-premature
                                                                                                                                        neonates or infants. Postanesthetic
                                                                                                                                        apnea may necessitate intensive care
                                                                                                                                        monitoring or even postoperative
                                                                                                                                        ventilation. Caffeine 10 mg/kg iv may
                                                                                                                                        protect against postop apnea.
                                   Pain                             Acetaminophen                                                       Continue acetaminophen 10 mg/kg
                                     management                                                                                         po q 4 h. May require additional opi-
                                                                                                                                        oids in PACU. Intraop NSAIDS are
                                                                                                                                        typically avoided due to concern of
                                                                                                                                        local bleeding, but may be discussed
                                                                                                                                        with surgeon for postop analgesia.

                                   Table 12.2–1. Ophthalmic Medications With Systemic Effects
                                   Medication                    Type                                       Effect
                                   Cyclopentolate                Cycloplegic                                GI disturbance, atropine-like toxicity (hyperthermia, tachycardia,
                                                                                                            delirium)
                                   Phenylephrine                 Mydriatic                                  Hypertension, reflex bradycardia or tachycardia, pulmonary
                                                                                                            edema, cardiac arrest, subarachnoid hemorrhage
                                   Acetylcholine                 Miotic                                     Bradycardia, hypotension, bronchospasm
                                   Pilocarpine                   Miotic agent, parasympathetic,             GI disturbance, diaphoresis
                                                                 used for glaucoma
                                   Timolol, levobunolol          Nonselective beta-agonists                 Bronchospasm, bradycardia, hypotension, apnea in neonates
                                   (Adapted from Justice LT, Valley RD, Bailey AG, Hauser MW: Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama Z, eds.
                                   Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011.)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. Bhardwaj N, Yaddanapudi S, Singh S, Pandav SS: Insertion of laryngeal mask airway does not increase the intraocular pressure
                                       in children with glaucoma. Paediatr Anaesth 2011; 10:1036–40.
                                    2. Chhabra A, Sinha R, Subramaniam R, et al: Comparison of sub-Tenon’s block with IV fentanyl for pediatric vitreoretinal
                                       surgery. Br J Anesth 2009; 103:739–43.
                                    3. Cunningham AJ, Barry P: Intraocular pressure-physiology and implications for anesthetic management. Can Anesth Soc J
                                       1986; 33:195–208.
                                    4. Haigh PM, Chiswick ML, O’Donoghue EP: Retinopathy of prematurity: systemic complications associated with different
                                       anesthetic techniques at treatment. Br J Ophthalmol 1997; 81:283–7.
                                    5. Hartnett ME, Penn JS: Mechanisms and management of retinopathy of prematurity. NEJM 2012; 367:2515–26.
                                    6. Henderson-Smart DJ, Steer PA: Prophylactic caffeine to prevent postoperative apnea following general anesthesia in preterm
                                       infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001; 4:CD000048.
                                    7. Justice LT, Valley RD, Bailey AG, Hauser MW: Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama Z, eds.
                                       Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011.
                                    8. Lili X, Jianjun S, Haiyun Z: The application of dexmedetomidine in children undergoing vitreoretinal surgery. J Anesth 2012;
                                       26:556–61.
                                    9. McGwin G, Xie A, Owsley C: Rate of eye injury in the United States. Arch Ophthalmol 2005; 123:970–6.
                                   10. Seaberg RR, Freeman WR, Goldbaum MH, et al: Permanent postoperative vision loss associated with expansion of intraocular
                                       gas in the presence of a nitrous oxide-containing anesthetic. Anesthesiology 2002; 91:1309–10.

===== PAGE 1209 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.3 Pediatric
                                           Otolaryngology

                                           surgeons
                                           Anna H. Messner, MD
                                           Kevin Huoh, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Samuel A. Mireles, MD
                                           Ellen Wang, MD
                                           Gregory B. Hammer, MD

===== PAGE 1210 =====
Myringotomy and Tympanostomy Tube
                                   Placement
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Tympanostomy (PE or pressure equalizing) tubes are placed in the patient with chronic serous otitis media
                                   (fluid in the middle ear for > 3 mo) or recurrent acute otitis media (6 or more episodes of otitis media over the prior yr).
                                   Occasionally, PE tubes are placed in a child with meningitis of otitic origin or with acute otitis media that is unresponsive
                                   to antibiotics. The patient is supine and the OR table in the 0° position. The microscope is positioned over the bed and the
                                   head turned to expose the ear. An ear speculum is inserted into the ear canal, cerumen is removed, and an incision is made
                                   in the tympanic membrane. Fluid is sometimes suctioned from the middle ear; then, a tympanostomy tube is inserted into
                                   the ear, straddling the tympanic membrane. Antibiotic ear drops frequently are inserted into the external auditory canal.
                                   Sometimes lidocaine and/or oxymetazoline drops are also inserted into the ear canal. The surgeon moves to the other side
                                   of the table, the microscope is repositioned, the head is turned, and the procedure is repeated on the other ear.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic serous otitis media (CSOM); recurrent acute otitis media (RAOM)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine; head to anesthesia

                                    Incision                 Tympanic membrane

                                    Special                  Operating microscope
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics              No parenteral antibiotics (except for SBE prophylaxis); topical antibiotic ear drops

                                    Surgical time            5–10 min. Patients with stenotic ear canals (e.g., Down syndrome) can take longer.

                                    EBL                      None

                                    Postop care              PACU → home

                                    Mortality                Rare

                                    Morbidity                Bleeding from ear
                                                             Purulent drainage from ear (otorrhea)

                                    Pain score               1–3

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Age range                3 mo+ (most common, 1–3 yr)

                                    Male:Female              1:1

                                    Incidence                Very common

                                    Etiology                 Chronic middle ear infections

                                    Associated               Cleft palate
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   The majority of children presenting for PE tubes are < 3 yr and generally in good health. Many of these children,
                                   however, have recurrent URI, which contributes to edema of the eustachian tubes, predisposing to episodes of acute
                                   otitis media. Intervals between URI may be brief, and scheduling surgery during these interludes is often impractical.

                            1210

===== PAGE 1211 =====
Myringotomy and Tympanostomy Tube Placement                 1211

                   Children with mild URI generally can be anesthetized safely for PE tube placement because tracheal intubation is gen-
                   erally not performed. Surgery should be delayed for patients with acute, febrile illnesses and in those with Sx referable
                   to the lower airways (e.g., productive cough, wheezing). Surgery need not be delayed if fever is 2° acute otitis media.

                    Respiratory              Surgery in patients with URI Sx referable to the extrathoracic airway alone is generally not
                                             delayed. These Sx include nasal congestion and/or discharge and mild conjunctivitis. Fever
                                             accompanied by productive cough and wheezing are Sx of lower respiratory tract involvement
                                             and should prompt rescheduling of the procedure 2–3 wk after these Sx have abated. In border-
                                             line cases (e.g., those with rales auscultated on chest exam but no other lower tract Sx), O2 sat
                                             may be measured by pulse oximetry. Procedures in patients with SpO2 < 95% should be deferred.

                    Laboratory               None

                    Premedication            Some practitioners advocate withholding premedication, as the duration of action of the pre-
                                             med may outlast the surgery. In general, however, we administer oral midazolam to patients
                                             > 9 mo (see p. D-1) and have not found a significant related delay in discharge from PACU.
                                             Parental presence in the OR may obviate the need for premedication in selected cases.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA via face mask

                    Induction                A standard inhalation induction with sevoflurane and O2 ± N2O is performed with routine
                                             monitoring. An oral airway commonly is inserted, as soft tissue obstruction may occur
                                             when the head is turned fully to the side during surgery. CPAP 5–8 cmH2O also may be
                                             useful in maintaining airway patency. Following induction, a one-time dose of rectal acet-
                                             aminophen (30–40 mg/kg) may be given for postop analgesia.

                    Maintenance              Marked agitation (“emergence delirium”) has been noted following emergence from sevo-
                                             flurane and other inhaled agents. A variety of strategies have been used to minimize this
                                             phenomenon, including nasal or im fentanyl (1–2 mcg/kg) or im morphine (0.1 mg/kg).
                                             Because an IV catheter is not placed routinely, IV drugs are not usually given.

                    Emergence                For bilateral procedures, the potent inhaled anesthetic is D/C’d before or during the 2nd
                                             myringotomy to facilitate prompt emergence. N2O is continued until the completion of
                                             surgery. As the patient is awakening, gentle oropharyngeal suctioning can be performed.

                    Blood and fluid          None
                       requirements

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                                             3 eyes

                    Complications            Laryngospasm                             Secretions → laryngospasm 2° irritation of the vocal
                                                                                      cords, especially in children with URI. Rx: 100% O2
                                                                                      and CPAP or manual ventilation with PEEP ≤ 20–25
                                                                                      cmH2O. Propofol 1–2 mg/kg iv may be given if iv is
                                                                                      present to help break laryngospasm and to facilitate
                                                                                      ventilation. If no improvement, succinylcholine (2–4
                                                                                      mg/kg im, or 0.5–1 mg/kg iv if iv is present) may be
                                                                                      needed if a significant decrease in SpO2 occurs and
                                                                                      ventilation is not possible. Atropine (0.01 mg/kg iv or
                                                                                      im, minimum 0.1 mg) may be given to mitigate bra-
                                                                                      dycardia associated with hypoxia as well as a poten-
                                                                                      tial side effect of succinylcholine. Oropharyngeal
                                                                                      suctioning and manual ventilation usually result in
                                                                                      resolution of the laryngospasm. Rarely, tracheal intu-
                                                                                      bation may be indicated for recurrent laryngospasm.

===== PAGE 1212 =====
1212   c hap t er 12.3          Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Laryngospasm                                  Laryngospasm may occur and should be treated
                                                                                                             as described above.

                                   Pain                        Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg po/iv q 6 h,           Consider previously administered po and/or pr
                                     management                or 30–40 mg/kg pr loading dose, fol-          dosing.
                                                               lowed by 20 mg/kg q 6 h
                                                               Ibuprofen 10 mg/kg po
                                                               Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg iv, or hydromor-
                                                               phone 2 mcg/kg iv

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Haupert MS, Pascual C, Mohan A et al: Parental satisfaction with anesthesia without intravenous access for myringotomy.
                                        Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004; 130(9):1025–8.
                                     2. Hippard HK, Govindan K, Friedman EM et al: Postoperative analgesic and behavioral effects of intranasal fentanyl, intravenous
                                        morphine, and intramuscular morphine in pediatric patients undergoing bilateral myringotomy and placement of ventilating
                                        tubes. Anesthe Analg 2012; 115(2):356–363.
                                     3. Hoffmann KK, Thompson GK, Burke BL, et al: Anesthetic complications of tympanostomy tube placement in children. Arch
                                        Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002; 128(9):1040–3.
                                     4. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                                     5. Lee JA, Jeon YA, Noh HI, et al: The effect of ketamine with remifentanil for improving the quality of anesthesia and recovery
                                        in pediatric patients undergoing middle-ear-ventilation tube insertion. J Int Med Res 2011; 39(6):2239–46.
                                     6. Lin YC, Tassone RF, Jahng S, et al: Acupuncture management of pain and emergence agitation in children after bilateral
                                        myringotomy and tympanostomy tube insertion. Paediatr Anaesth 2009; 19(11):1096–101.
                                     7. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.
                                     8. Pappas AL, Fluder EM, Creech S et al: Postoperative analgesia in children undergoing myringotomy and placement
                                        equalization tubes in ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 2003; 96(6):1621–4.
                                     9. Vornov P, Tobin MK, Bilings K, Cote CJ, Iyer A, Suresh S: Postoperative pain relief in infants undergoing myringotomy and
                                        tube placement: comparison of a novel regional anesthetic block to intranasal fentanyl-a complete analysis. Paediatr Anaesth.
                                        2008; 8(12):1196–201.

                                   Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The dissection is carried out with the patient supine, shoulders slightly elevated by a shoulder roll (typ-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   ically, a rolled towel). A mouth gag is inserted, and a small suction catheter is passed through the nose and brought
                                   out the mouth to elevate the soft palate and expose the nasopharynx. The adenoids are viewed with a mirror and/
                                   or palpated. A curette, adenotome, microdebrider, or suction electrocautery is used to remove the adenoids; then,
                                   typically, the nasopharynx is packed. There are two major types of tonsillectomy: total tonsillectomy and subtotal
                                   (partial) tonsillectomy. The traditional total tonsillectomy is performed by grasping the tonsil with Allis forceps
                                   and pulling it medially. A vertical incision is made in the anterior tonsillar pillar with a sickle knife, scissors, or elec-
                                   trocautery instruments; then, the tonsil is dissected from the surrounding tissue and removed. A snare may be used
                                   to amputate the inferior pole of the tonsil before removal. Hemostasis is obtained through use of packs and suction
                                   electrocautery. After hemostasis has been obtained in the tonsillar fossae, the pack is removed from the nasophar-
                                   ynx, and hemostasis is achieved in the nasopharynx using suction electrocautery. Tonsils can also be completely
                                   removed using radiofrequency (Coblation), bipolar scissors, bipolar forceps, or laser. The same approach and setup
                                   is used for a subtotal tonsillectomy, which can be performed using radiofrequency or a microdebrider. The literature
                                   on incisional local anesthetic injection is mixed with some studies reporting benefit and some showing no benefit.
                                   Therefore, injection is not generally recommended.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA); chronic tonsillitis and/or adenoiditis; tonsillar and
                                   adenoid hypertrophy; asymmetric enlargement of tonsils (to r/o cancer)

===== PAGE 1213 =====
Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy          1213

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, shoulder roll, head extended; table turned 90°; surgeon at head of table

                     Incision               Intraoral mucosal

                     Special                Mouth gag (McIvor, Crowe-Davis, Dingman)
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Observe for compression of ETT or accidental extubation when mouth gag is manipulated. Patients
                       considerations       with Down syndrome may need to be evaluated preop for possible atlantoaxial subluxation, as the
                                            neck is typically extended. A single dose of dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg) is recommended for children
                                            undergoing tonsillectomy.

                     Antibiotics            Not used routinely.

                     Surgical time          30 min

                     EBL                    10–200 mL. Monitor closely.

                     Postop care            Lateral position; suction in midline only. Most commonly, PACU → home. Overnight stay,
                                            if < 2 yr, severe OSA, or other comorbidities.

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Bleeding: 2–3%
                                            Aspiration: Rare
                                            Tooth damage: Rare

                     Pain score             Adenoidectomy, 3–5; tonsillectomy, 6–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              1 yr+ (most common, 2–8 yr)

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              300,000 cases/yr in the United States

                     Etiology               OSA; chronic infection; peritonsillar abscess; snoring. (R/O lymphoma, carcinoma, lympho-
                                            proliferative disease.)

                     Associated             Down syndrome
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Although most children presenting for tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy are healthy, a variety of medical prob-
                   lems may coexist. Severe adenoidal hyperplasia may cause nasopharyngeal obstruction, obligate mouth breathing,
                   failure to thrive 2° poor feeding, and disturbances of speech and sleep. Chronic nasal obstruction may result in
                   narrowing of the upper airway and dental and facial changes (so-called adenoidal facies). Tonsillar hyperplasia may
                   cause airway obstruction, OSA, CO2 retention, cor pulmonale, and failure to thrive. Most of these changes are revers-
                   ible with removal of the adenoids and tonsils. Children presenting for adenoidectomy/tonsillectomy also frequently
                   have URI (see Anesthetic Considerations for Myringotomy and Tympanostomy Tube Placement p. 1210).

                    Respiratory                See discussion under Anesthetic Considerations for Myringotomy and Tympanostomy
                                               Tube Placement (see p. 1210).

                    Dental                     Examination of the airway should include inspection of the teeth. Parents should
                                               be advised that loose teeth may be dislodged during placement of the mouth gag or
                                               laryngoscopy.

===== PAGE 1214 =====
1214   c hap t er 12.3    Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                   Cardiovascular         In children with severe OSA, CXR and EKG should be done to evaluate the presence of
                                                          cor pulmonale. If significant RVH and/or cardiomegaly are present, consider ECHO and
                                                          consultation by pediatric cardiologist.

                                   Hematologic            A careful Hx is taken for Sx of easy bruising or bleeding. If present, a CBC with Plt count,
                                                          as well as PT, INR, PTT, and bleeding time are performed. In patients with a negative Hx,
                                                          we order no preop lab tests.

                                   Premedication          Children with severe OSA (airway obstruction) who are very anxious may receive a
                                                          reduced dose of oral midazolam (see p. D-1) in a well-monitored environment (e.g., with
                                                          an experienced RN or member of the anesthesia team present). SpO2 should be moni-
                                                          tored following administration of premedication.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GA with ETT or LMA

                                   Induction            Standard inhalation induction (see p. D-1) is common, but IV induction with propofol
                                                        can be faster and safer, especially in patients with severe OSA; airway obstruction is
                                                        common in these patients and usually is alleviated with placement of an oral airway and
                                                        administration of CPAP: 10–20 cmH2O. An IV catheter should be placed as soon as pos-
                                                        sible. Propofol (2 mg/kg) is usually given to facilitate intubation. If needed rocuronium
                                                        (0.5 mg/kg) may be used. Glycopyrrolate (4–6 mcg/kg) may be used if needed to reduce
                                                        secretions. If intubation is planned, an oral ETT (standard or RAE) is used and taped
                                                        securely to the midline position to facilitate placement of the mouth gag. A cuffed ETT
                                                        is commonly used because, in combination with a throat pack, it minimizes the risk of
                                                        entry of blood and oral secretions into the trachea during surgery. Care should be exer-
                                                        cised that the inferior part of the endotracheal tube is long enough for the cuff to pass
                                                        beyond the vocal cords. A short tube may easily dislodge with changes in head position,
                                                        or the cuff may cause vocal cord trauma. Bilateral breath sounds and chest excursion
                                                        should be confirmed after placement of the mouth gag, which may cause kinking and
                                                        obstruction of the ETT. An LMA (flexible or reinforced LMA) can be used as an alterna-
                                                        tive to the ETT in healthy, nonobese patients without OSA, with advantages of reduced
                                                        airway irritation and total procedure time. Problems with the LMA include inadequate
                                                        surgical exposure and leaking or kinking resulting in conversion to an ETT.

                                   Maintenance          Standard maintenance (see p. D-3). An intermediate-acting NMR (e.g., rocuronium 0.6–1.0
                                                        mg/kg or vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg) may be given to facilitate tracheal intubation if needed.
                                                        Opioids (e.g., fentanyl 2–3 mcg/kg, hydromorphone 3 mcg/kg or morphine 0.02–0.05 mg/
                                                        kg) are given for postop analgesia. Acetaminophen (30–40 mg/kg) may be given PR after
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                        induction (↓ dose if PO acetaminophen given with premedication). IV acetaminophen
                                                        (10 mg/kg) may also be used. Dexmedetomidine (1 mcg/kg bolus over 10 min, followed
                                                        by 0.4–0.7 mcg/kg/h infusion) can be used as an adjunct to reduce opioid requirements
                                                        and emergence agitation. The use of propofol, ± remifentanil, instead of anesthetic vapor,
                                                        may ↓ the incidence of PONV, which is common following tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy.
                                                        Ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg, up to 1 mg) and dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg) are given to reduce
                                                        airway edema and PONV. Although controversial because of potential postoperative hem-
                                                        orrhage, perioperative use of NSAIDs can also be given to reduce PONV. Administration
                                                        of 30 mL/kg of IV fluids (lactate Ringer or normal saline) has been associated with reduced
                                                        PONV.

                                   Emergence            Blood and secretions should be suctioned from the oropharynx and stomach following the
                                                        completion of surgery. The patient should be fully awake before tracheal extubation, which
                                                        may be performed supine or in the lateral position with the head down. Verify removal
                                                        of throat packs. Alternatively, extubating under deep anesthesia decreases coughing, but
                                                        requires vigilance to avoid airway obstruction and aspiration at emergence and during
                                                        transport to PACU.

===== PAGE 1215 =====
Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy               1215

                    Blood and fluid             IV: 22 or 20 ga × 1                          Blood loss is typically ~4 mL/kg and may accumu-
                       requirements             NS/LR @ 5–10 mL/h                            late in the stomach → N/V (unless prevented by
                                                                                             antiemetics).

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                    Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                3 eyes

                    Complications               Airway obstruction
                                                ETT dislodgement/kinking                     Usually caused by insertion/manipulation of mouth
                                                                                             gag.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Airway obstruction                           Retention of throat pack → airway obstruction.
                                                                                             Remove with Magill forceps. Recurrent airway
                                                                                             obstruction may require application of positive pres-
                                                                                             sure via face mask (CPAP vs manual ventilation with
                                                                                             PEEP) ± placement of an oral airway. Severe postop
                                                                                             airway obstruction is more common in patients
                                                                                             < 2 yr. In these patients, admission to PICU may be
                                                                                             necessary. CPAP via face mask or nasal mask may
                                                                                             be helpful. On rare occasions, tracheal intubation
                                                                                             and mechanical ventilation are required until swell-
                                                                                             ing of the airway resolves.
                                                Hemorrhage                                   Bleeding may occur in the immediate postop period
                                                                                             or several days later. Patients present with anemia
                                                                                             and hypovolemia, as well as airway compromise
                                                                                             and a full stomach 2° swallowed blood. IV fluids,
                                                                                             including blood, should be given before induction.
                                                                                             Rapid-sequence intubation (see p. B-5) should be
                                                                                             performed with cricoid pressure in preparation for
                                                                                             surgical treatment.

                    Pain                        Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg iv                         May be given incrementally in PACU. Subsequently,
                      management                Hydromophone 2 mcg/kg iv or                  acetaminophen (10 mg/kg po) alternating with ibu-
                                                Morphine 0.025–0.05 mg/kg iv                 profen (10 mg/kg po) may be used. ⋆NB: Codeine
                                                                                             should NOT be used, as some patients may be ultr-
                                                                                             arapid metabolizers (due to cytochrome P4SO2D6
                                                                                             variant), and this may lead to respiratory depression

                                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                             and death.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Allford M, Guruswamy V: A national survey of the anesthetic management of tonsillectomy surgery in children. Paediatr
                        Anaesth 2009; 19 (2):145–152.
                     2. Baugh RF, Archer SM, Mitchell RB, et al: American Academy of Otolaryngology. Head and Neck Foundation. Clinical Practice
                        Guideline: Tonsillectomy in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2011; 144 (1 Suppl):S1–30.
                     3. Ciszkowski C, Madadi P, Philips MS et al: Codeine, ultrarapid metabolism genotype and post-operative death. N Engl J Med
                        2009; 361(8):827–8.
                     4. Francis A, Eltaki K, Bash T, et al: The safety of preoperative sedation in children with sleep-disordered breathing. Int J Pediatr
                        Otorhinolaryngol 2006; 70(9):1517–21.
                     5. Kelly LE, Rieder M, Van Dan Anker J, et al: More codeine fatalities after tonsillectomy in North American Children. Pediatrics
                        2012; 129(5):e1343–7.
                     6. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                     7. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.

===== PAGE 1216 =====
1216   c hap t er 12.3          Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                     8. Park AH, Pappas AL, Fluder E, et al: Effect of perioperative administration of ropivacaine with epinephrine on postoperative
                                        pediatric adenotonsillectomy recovery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004; 130(4):459–64.
                                     9. Patel A, Davidson M, Tran MC, et al: Dexmedetomidine infusion for analgesia and prevention of emergence agitation in children
                                        with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome undergoing tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. Anesth Analg 2010; 111(4):1004–1010.
                                    10. Raeder J: Ambulatory anesthesia aspects for tonsillectomy and abrasion in children. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(6):
                                        620–626.
                                    11. Sierpina DI, Chaudhary H. Walner DL, et al: Laryngeal mask airway versus endotracheal tube in pediatric adenotonsillectomy.
                                        Laryngoscope 2012; 122(2):429–35.
                                    12. Smith SL, Pereira KD: Tonsillectomy in children: indications, diagnosis and complications. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat
                                        Spec. 2007; 69(6):336–9.
                                    13. Voelker R: Children’s deaths linked with postsurgical codeine. JAMA 2012; 208(10):963.

                                   BRONCHOSCOPY/ESOPHAGOSCOPY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Flexible bronchoscopy is performed when the dynamics of the larynx and trachea need to be visual-
                                   ized. The child is supine on the OR table, which is turned 90–180°. With the child sedated or under GA, but breath-
                                   ing spontaneously, the bronchoscope is passed through the nose into the pharynx by way of an adapter attached to
                                   a standard anesthesia mask. Alternatively, the bronchoscope can be passed through an LMA if visualization of the
                                   pharynx is not required. The larynx is viewed with the patient breathing spontaneously so that vocal cord movement
                                   can be observed; then the anesthesia is deepened and the bronchoscope passed into the trachea. The trachea and
                                   bronchi are viewed, and when indicated, bronchoalveolar lavage or bronchial biopsy can be performed.
                                   Rigid bronchoscopy is preferred when direct ventilation of the trachea is required and/or when foreign bodies (FBs)
                                   need to be removed. It also can be used for Dx of airway lesions. Direct laryngoscopy is performed, and topical anes-
                                   thetic is applied to the larynx and trachea. The rigid bronchoscope is passed through the vocal cords into the trachea.
                                   The anesthesia tubing is connected to the bronchoscope, and the patient is ventilated through the scope. If a FB is pres-
                                   ent, the telescope within the bronchoscope will be removed and optical forceps inserted through the bronchoscope to
                                   remove the FB. During the time when the telescope is being changed, a leak will be present in the ventilation system.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Airway obstruction; stridor; bronchial FB; pneumonia (requiring bronchoalveolar lavage);
                                   tracheal or bronchial lesion
                                   Flexible or rigid esophagoscopy can be performed for diagnostic or therapeutic (removal of FB) purposes. Flex-
                                   ible esophagoscopy can be performed under sedation; however, GETA is preferred for rigid esophagoscopy. The
                                   esophagoscope is inserted through the mouth into the esophagus, and the entire length of the esophagus is viewed.
                                   If a FB is to be removed with the rigid esophagoscope, the telescope and forceps are passed through the lumen of the
                                   esophagoscope. If a FB (especially foodstuff ) is to be removed with the flexible esophagoscope, the scope may need
                                   to be passed several times.
                                   Esophageal dilation may be performed in one of several ways. Balloon dilation can be performed with the flexible
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   esophagoscope. Alternatively, a guide wire can be passed through the esophagoscope; then Savary/Gilliard dilators, in
                                   successively larger sizes, are passed over the wire. Another option is to remove the esophagoscope after the stenosis
                                   has been visualized; then, Maloney or Hurst dilators are passed blindly through the mouth and into the esophagus.
                                   Care must be taken to avoid accidental extubation of the patient while the dilators are being inserted and removed.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: GERD; esophageal FB; esophageal stricture

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Bronchoscopy                                            Esophagoscopy

                                    Position                  Patient supine; table turned 90°                        ⇐

                                    Unique                    Ventilate through rigid bronchoscope. Ventilate via     Observe for accidental extubation. ETT taped
                                      considerations          mask with adapter for flexible bronchoscope or          to left side of mouth.
                                                              via LMA. Dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg) may be
                                                              indicated, if glottic or subglottic edema is present.

                                    Antibiotics               None                                                    ⇐

===== PAGE 1217 =====
Laryngoscopy, Supraglottoplasty, Excision of Laryngeal Lesions           1217

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                            Bronchoscopy                                   Esophagoscopy

                     Surgical time          10 min–1.5 h                                   15 min–1 h

                     EBL                    None                                           < 10 mL

                     Postop care            Watch for airway compromise; PACU.             PACU

                     Mortality              Rare                                           ⇐

                     Morbidity              Laryngospasm                                   Esophageal perforation
                                            Laryngeal edema                                Bleeding
                                            Dental trauma                                  ⇐

                     Pain score             3–4                                            3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Newborn+

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common

                     Associated             Bronchoscopy requiring bronchial alveolar lavage (BAL): immunocompromised patient
                       conditions           Esophageal stricture: tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
                                            Esophageal FB: esophageal stricture

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laryngoscopy, Supraglottoplasty, Excision of Laryngeal Lesions, p. 1218.

                   Laryngoscopy, Supraglottoplasty, Excision of
                   Laryngeal Lesions
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                   Description: Flexible laryngoscopy typically is performed in the clinic setting, but may be performed in the OR in
                   an unstable or uncooperative child. In addition, flexible laryngoscopy may be performed as a diagnostic procedure
                   in the OR to identify anatomical obstruction in OSA patients, termed a sleep endoscopy. For this proceure, the ideal
                   plane at anesthesia simulates a physiologic sleep state. The patient should be breathing spontaneously and will be in
                   a sitting (with support) or supine position. Topical anesthesia and vasoconstrictors are applied to the nose; then the
                   scope is passed through the nose into the pharynx, and the larynx is viewed. Vocal cord function is best assessed with
                   the child only mildly sedated.
                   Diagnostic direct laryngoscopy is performed with the child in a supine position, table turned 90°, with a small
                   shoulder roll in place. The laryngoscope is introduced, and with a lifting motion, a thorough exam of the oropharynx,
                   hypopharynx, and larynx is performed. If more than a brief exam is to take place, the vocal cords are anesthetized
                   with topical lidocaine to help prevent laryngospasm. A telescope (often connected via camera to a video monitor)
                   or rigid ventilating bronchoscope may be passed through the vocal cords to observe the trachea and major bronchi.
                   Microlaryngoscopy with removal/ablation of laryngeal lesions—most commonly papillomas, nodules, or polyps—
                   is accomplished by suspending the laryngoscope from the Mayo stand or OR table, using a suspension apparatus.
                   The patient continues to breathe spontaneously or is paralyzed and jet-ventilated. Papillomas may be removed with

===== PAGE 1218 =====
1218   c hap t er 12.3        Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                   a cup forceps, microdebrider, or laser. When the laser is used, the patient’s eyes and face are covered with a damp
                                   cloth. OR personnel must wear protective glasses. A microscope with the laser attached is positioned so that the laser
                                   beam passes through the laryngoscope onto the vocal folds. Alternatively, the laser may be held by the surgeon and
                                   passed through an optical fiber.
                                   Young infants with severe laryngomalacia may undergo a supraglottoplasty for relief of airway obstruction. The
                                   laryngoscope is suspended, and the laser or microlaryngeal instruments are used to remove redundant aryepiglottic
                                   fold tissue. Children with subglottic or tracheal stenosis may undergo microdirect laryngoscopy with dilation, either
                                   by balloon or rigid dilator.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Diagnostic laryngoscopy: hoarseness; airway obstruction; stridor; subglottic stenosis.
                                   Operative laryngoscopy: laryngeal papillomas; laryngeal nodules; laryngeal web; laryngeal polyps; subglottic hem-
                                    angioma or cysts; severe laryngomalacia

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine; table turned 90°; shoulder roll

                                    Special                 ± Jet ventilation; laryngoscope suspension apparatus; video equipment; operating microscope
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Potential laser precautions; patient usually not intubated; dexamethasone 0.5–1.0 mg/kg to pre-
                                      considerations        vent laryngeal edema; laryngeal topical lidocaine 0.4 mg/kg.

                                    Antibiotics             None

                                    Surgical time           15–90 min

                                    EBL                     < 5 mL

                                    Postop care             Observe for airway obstruction in PACU.

                                    Mortality               Rare

                                    Morbidity               Laryngospasm
                                                            Laryngeal edema
                                                            Dental trauma

                                    Pain score              3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Newborn +

                                    Male:Female             1:1
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Incidence               Occasional

                                    Etiology                Papillomas: Most commonly, viral infection contracted from mother during vaginal delivery
                                                            Nodules, polyps: Vocal abuse, gastropharyngeal reflux
                                                            Subglottic hemangioma: Unknown
                                                            Subglottic cyst: Prior intubation
                                                            Laryngeal cysts, webs: Congenital malformation
                                                            Laryngomalacia: Unknown

                                    Associated              Chronic hoarseness, stridor; GERD; FTT
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   (Procedures covered: bronchoscopy; esophagoscopy; laryngoscopy; supraglottoplasty; excision of laryngeal
                                   lesions)

===== PAGE 1219 =====
Laryngoscopy, Supraglottoplasty, Excision of Laryngeal Lesions             1219

                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Direct laryngoscopy (DL) is performed most commonly for patients with stridor. In infants, stridor is most often 2°
                   laryngomalacia, with vocal cord paralysis and obstructive airway lesions being less common. Patients with severe laryngo-
                   malacia and those with posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease involving the epiglottis may undergo supraglottoplasty.
                   Older children may present with stridor 2° laryngeal masses or papillomatosis, for which laser excision may be performed.
                   A careful H&P is contributory to Dx, after which flexible laryngoscopy in the otolaryngology clinic can be confirmatory.
                   Laryngoscopy and rigid bronchoscopy also are performed for the removal of airway foreign bodies (FBs). A Hx of
                   choking and/or coughing while eating is usually elicited. Children may present with agitation, wheezing, and cyanosis.
                   This condition constitutes a true surgical emergency, and the patient should be taken to the OR as soon as possible.

                    Airway/                  Stridor usually is worsened with crying or agitation and often is less severe during sleep.
                       respiratory

                    Dental                   Any loose teeth may be dislodged.

                    Laboratory               No routine tests indicated. In stable patients with suspected FB aspiration, CXR may be
                                             obtained.

                    Premedication            Because stridor often is decreased during quiet breathing and sleep, premedication with
                                             oral midazolam is usually beneficial in patients > 9 mo. Children with FB aspiration gen-
                                             erally should not be given PO medications. They may benefit from small doses of iv mid-
                                             azolam. EMLA or ELA-max® cream may be applied 45 or 20 min (respectively) in advance
                                             to iv sites for topical anesthesia.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA. Primary and backup plans for airway management during the procedure should be
                   discussed in detail with the otolaryngologist surgeon in advance of anesthetic induction.

                    Induction                Mask induction is followed by placement of an iv catheter, if not already in place. Sponta-
                                             neous breathing is preferred in cases where vocal cord function and airway collapse must
                                             be evaluated and can be acheived with sevoflurane in 100% O2. Alternatively, propofol (2–3
                                             mg/kg) ± ketamine (1–2 mg/kg) may be used for induction followed by a continuous infu-
                                             sion (see below). Glycopyrrolate (4–6 mcg/kg) can be given to reduce oral secretions.

                    Maintenance              Before removal of the face mask for DL, a deep level of anesthesia is achieved. During DL,
                                             blow-by O2 is administered. Topical airway anesthesia (lidocane) is typically applied by an
                                             ENT surgeon to the vocal cords and larynx, and IV dexamethasone is often requested to
                                             prevent airway edema postoperatively.
                                             For patients in whom vocal cord function must be assessed a gradual reduction of inhala-
                                             tional anesthesia or an iv anesthetic infusion should → ↑ vocal cord excursion. Supraglot-

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                                             toplasty and laser excision of laryngeal lesions may be performed with intermittent mask
                                             anesthesia. Propofol ± remifentanil or ketamine may be used, thereby avoiding contamina-
                                             tion of the OR with inhaled anesthetics while providing continuous anesthesia. In general,
                                             the trachea is not intubated, as even a small ETT will interfere with the surgical procedure.
                                             However, a low flow of oxygen through a small ETT can be placed near the glottic open-
                                             ing. For certain procedures (flexible bronchoscopy/laryngoscopy, bronchoaleolar lavage), a
                                             LMA car can be used for airway management. For patients who are paralyzed or hypoven-
                                             tilating, jet ventilation may be maintained using a Sanders jet ventilator (see Fig. 3-3,
                                             p. 187). Intermittent jets of 100% O2 are delivered with a high-pressure (40–55 psi) gas source
                                             through a tube incorporated into the laryngoscope blade. As the jet is pointed toward the
                                             glottic opening, gas is entrained by the Venturi effect. Manual jet ventilation is performed
                                             while chest excursion is observed to ensure that excessive inflating pressures and volumes are
                                             avoided. During jet ventilation, anesthesia is maintained with iv agents. Propofol 100–200
                                             mcg/kg/min, accompanied by remifentanil 0.5–1 mcg/kg/min. Alternatively, dexmedeto-
                                             midine 0.5–1 mcg/kg bolus followed by 0.4–0.7 mcg/kg/h iv infusion may be used. Small
                                             increments of ketamine 0.1–0.25 mg/kg iv may be bolused if additional sedation is needed.

===== PAGE 1220 =====
1220   c hap t er 12.3       Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                   Maintenance              NB: Fire hazard during laser surgery is minimal in the absence of a combustible material
                                     (cont’d)               (e.g., plastic) in the field. An FiO2 of 1.0 may, therefore, be used safely, unless a plastic ETT
                                                            is in place. For selected laser procedures involving the tissues around the glottis, a metal or
                                                            metal-wrapped ETT may be used. When a plastic ETT is in place, the lowest possible FiO2
                                                            is used (O2/air mixture) to maintain an acceptable SpO2.
                                                            During rigid bronchoscopy, ventilation is performed through a side port of the broncho-
                                                            scope. Assisted, spontaneous ventilation under deep inhalational anesthesia may be main-
                                                            tained. Alternatively, iv anesthesia with or without muscle relaxation may be preferred, as
                                                            described earlier. For FB cases, maintenance of spontaneous ventilation generally is pre-
                                                            ferred to avoid distal displacement of the FB. Gentle, assisted ventilation may be required,
                                                            however, to ensure adequate oxygenation and ventilation.

                                   Emergence                A conventional ETT sometimes is placed after removal of the laryngoscope or broncho-
                                                            scope, as laryngospasm following these procedures is common. Tracheal extubation is per-
                                                            formed with the patient fully awake and following complete reversal of neuromuscular
                                                            blockade, if applicable. Postoperatively, nebulized recemic epinepheine and corticosteroids
                                                            may be used to treat stridor and airway edema, and ICU admission should be considered
                                                            in severe cases.

                                   Blood and fluid          IV: 22 ga × 1                            Blood loss is minimal.
                                      requirements          NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h

                                   Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                                   Positioning              Table rotated 90°                        Shoulder roll/neck extension for surgery
                                                            3 and pad pressure points
                                                            3 eyes                                   Eyes covered with wet sponges or goggles when
                                                                                                     laser in use.

                                   Complications            Hypoventilation                          Adjust Sanders jet; mask ventilation prn.
                                                            Hypoxemia
                                                            Airway injury                            2° jet ventilation, DL/bronchoscope
                                                            Pneumothorax
                                                            Laryngospasm                             Rx: 100% O2, CPAP vs manual ventilation/PEEP
                                                            Eye injury
                                                            Airway fire                              Remove ETT; irrigate with NS; resume ventilation
                                                                                                     with 100% O2 when fire extinguished.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications            Dental trauma
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            Bleeding
                                                            Eye trauma
                                                            Pneumothorax

                                   Pain                     Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg po/iv q 6 h or 30–40 mg/kg pr loading dose, followed by
                                     management             20 mg/kg q 6 h—check previous acetaminophen usage in OR
                                                            Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg iv q 10 min prn
                                                            Hydromorphone 2 mcg/kg iv q 10–20 min prn
                                                            Ibuprofen 10 mg/kg po q 6

                                   Tests                    CXR                                      If respiratory distress or ↓ SpO2 present.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. Best C: Paediatric airway anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(1):38–41.
                                    2. Dilos BM: Anesthesia for pediatric airway endoscopy and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2009;
                                       47(3):55–62.

===== PAGE 1221 =====
Removal of Branchial Cleft Cyst or Thyroglossal Duct Cyst               1221

                     3. Durden F, Sobol SE: Balloon laryngoplasty as a primary treatment for subglottic stenosis. Arch Otolaryngol Head and Neck
                        Surg 2003; 133(8):772–5.
                     4. Farrell PT: Rigid bronchoscopy for foreign body removal: anaesthesia and ventilation. Paediatr Anaesth 2004; 14(1):84–9.
                     5. Jaggar SI, Haxby E: Sedation, anaesthesia and monitoring for bronchoscopy. Paediatr Respir Rev 2002; 3(4):321–7.
                     6. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                     7. Mandel JE: Laryngeal mask airways in ear, nose, and throat procedures. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 28(3):469–83.
                     8. Naguib ML, Streetman DS, Clifton S, et al: Use of laryngeal mask airway in flexible bronchoscopy in infants and children.
                        Pediatr Pulmonol 2005; 39(1):56–63.
                     9. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.
                    10. Seybold JL, Ramamurthi RJ, Hammer GB: The use of dexmedetomidine during laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and tracheal
                        extubation following tracheal reconstruction. Paediatr Anaesth 2007; 17(12):1212–14.
                    11. Shott SR: Down syndrome: analysis of airway size and a guide for appropriate intubation. Laryngoscope 2000; 110(4):585–92.
                    12. Thompson DM: Abnormal sensorimotor integrative function of the larynx in congenital laryngomalacia: a new theory of
                        etiology. Laryngoscope 2007; 117(6 Pt 2 Suppl 114):1–33.
                    13. Yellon RF: Prevention and management of complications of airway surgery in children. Paediatr Anaesth 2004; 14(1):107–11.

                   Removal of Branchial Cleft Cyst or
                   Thyroglossal Duct Cyst
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Branchial cleft cysts and tracts typically present in the lateral neck; thyroglossal duct cysts, in the
                   midline. Removal consists of making an incision in the neck around the opening of the tract (if present), or over the
                   palpable cyst, and following the tract superiorly to its origin. A Sistrunk procedure is performed in the case of a
                   thyroglossal duct cyst and involves the removal of the middle section of the hyoid bone.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Branchial cleft cyst; thyroglossal duct cyst

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine; head 180° from anesthesia; oral intubation

                     Incision                 Horizontal neck

                     Antibiotics              Clindamycin 10 mg/kg or cefazolin 25 mg/kg

                     Surgical time            45–90 min

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                     EBL                      10–50 mL

                     Postop care              Routine

                     Mortality                Rare

                     Morbidity                Bleeding/neck hematoma Infection
                                              Recurrence of cyst
                                              Damage to CN XI, XII

                     Pain score               4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Newborn–adult

                     Male:Female              1:1

===== PAGE 1222 =====
1222   c hap t er 12.3       Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                    Etiology                Congenital

                                    Associated              Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Incision/Drainage of Deep Neck Abscess (p. 1223).

                                   Incision/Drainage of Deep Neck Abscess
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Children with deep neck abscesses (retropharyngeal, parapharyngeal, peritonsillar) are at risk for acute
                                   airway obstruction; therefore, the abscesses are drained on an emergent basis. Retropharyngeal and peritonsillar
                                   abscesses typically are drained through an intraoral approach; parapharyngeal abscesses, through an external neck
                                   approach. In each case, the child must be intubated orally and placed in the supine position. The anesthesiologist or
                                   otolaryngologist who is intubating the child must be prepared for abnormal pharyngeal anatomy 2° the abscess. Care
                                   must be taken that the abscess is not ruptured in the intubation process. In most cases, the child can be extubated
                                   immediately after the abscess is drained; however, in a small number of cases, the child may need to remain intubated
                                   until the pharyngeal edema subsides.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Retropharyngeal, parapharyngeal, or peritonsillar abscess

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine; table turned 90–180°; oral intubation

                                    Incision                Intraoral (retropharyngeal or peritonsillar abscess); lateral neck (parapharyngeal abscess)

                                    Unique                  Acute airway obstruction can occur with induction. Care must be taken to avoid rupture of
                                      considerations        abscess on intubation; ± dexamethasone 0.5–1 mg/kg.

                                    Antibiotics             Clindamycin 10 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time           30–90 min
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    EBL                     < 30 mL

                                    Postop care             May remain intubated postop.

                                    Mortality               Rare

                                    Morbidity               Aspiration (if abscess ruptures spontaneously)
                                                            Airway obstruction 2° aspiration or edema
                                                            Bleeding

                                    Pain score              5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Most common, 6 mo–3 yr; can occur at any age.

                                    Male:Female             1:1

===== PAGE 1223 =====
Incision/Drainage of Deep Neck Abscess          1223

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence             Uncommon

                     Etiology              URI

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: excision of branchial cleft and thyroglossal duct cyst; incision/drainage of neck abscess)

                        PREOPERATIVE
                   These patients generally are otherwise healthy children. A cystic hygroma (cystic lymphangioma), as with other neck
                   masses, may cause airway obstruction and difficult intubation.

                    Respiratory             The size and extent of the neck mass should be defined carefully in an effort to detect the
                                            potential for airway compromise and to avoid soft-tissue trauma during intubation, with
                                            consequent acute airway obstruction. Inspiratory stridor suggests supraglottic obstruc-
                                            tion, while expiratory stridor is associated with subglottic/intrathoracic obstruction. These
                                            patients should have had prior CT/MRI imaging; scans and anesthesia records for these
                                            studies should be reviewed.
                                            Tests: CXR; CT/MRI

                    Cardiovascular          Cervical masses may be adherent to and/or cause compression of the great vessels.
                                            Tests: CT/MRI

                    Hematologic             T&C for cystic hygroma, or if a cervical mass involves great vessels or extends into the
                                            mediastinum.
                                            Tests: Hct

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           If > 9–12 mo and asymptomatic, midazolam (0.5–0.75 mg po) 30 min prior to arrival in
                                            OR. Avoid all premedication in patients with significant potential for airway compromise.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                    Induction               Standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1) in patients without airway compromise. When
                                            airway obstruction is present, iv should be secured prior to mask induction, which may
                                            be done with sevoflurane in 100% O2. As the plane of anesthesia deepens, gently assist
                                            ventilation. Consider giving atropine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg iv) prior to laryngoscopy. If
                                            partial airway obstruction exists, maintain spontaneous ventilation with CPAP and
                                            perform laryngoscopy at ~3 MAC of volatile agent. FOB/Video laryngoscope should
                                            be available. Have full range of ETT sizes available airway narrowing may be pres-
                                            ent. Once airway is secured, proceed with neuromuscular blockade (e.g., rocuronium
                                            0.6–1.0 mg/kg or vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg) if needed.

                    Maintenance             Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3). Surgeon may infiltrate incision with local
                                            anesthetic. Limit lidocaine to 5 mg/kg when used without epinephrine, or 7 mg/kg when
                                            used with epinephrine, bupivacaine to 2.5 mg/kg and ropivicaine 2.5 mg/kg.

                    Emergence               Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg iv) and atropine (0.02 mg/
                                            kg iv). Extubate when fully awake.

===== PAGE 1224 =====
1224   c hap t er 12.3         Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                   Blood and fluid            Minimal blood loss usually               Minimal 3rd-space losses. Each mL blood loss can
                                      requirements            IV: 20–22 ga × 1                         be replaced with 3 mL NS/LR. When great ves-
                                                              Great vessel involvement:                sels involved, place at least 1 iv in lower extremity.
                                                                IV: 20 ga × 1–2                        Blood loss can be quite sudden; have blood available
                                                                NS/LR @ 3 mL/kg/h                      in OR.

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                                              ± Arterial line, 22 ga                   An arterial line is used when there is risk of large
                                                                                                       blood loss or periop airway compromise.

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                                              3 eyes

                                   Complications              ETT dislodged/loss of airway             ETT must be secured carefully. Liberal use of ben-
                                                              Laryngospasm                             zoin adherent. Avoid tension on ETT by circuit
                                                              Bronchospasm                             hoses. Hold ETT during surgeon’s intraoral exami-
                                                              Hemorrhage                               nation to prevent accidental extubation.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Subglottic edema                         Dexamethasone (0.5–1 mg/kg iv) and nebulized
                                                              Upper airway obstruction from            racemic epinephrine (1.25%) with mist O2 to treat
                                                               Edema related to tumor                 subglottic edema.
                                                                resection
                                                              Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

                                   Pain                       Morphine (0.025–0.1 mg/kg iv q           The majority of these procedures are performed on
                                     management               2–4 h)                                   outpatient basis (except cystic hygroma).
                                                              Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg po/iv
                                                              q 6 h, or 30–40 mg/kg pr loading
                                                              dose, followed by 20 mg/kg q 6 h

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                                     2. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Laryngotracheal Reconstruction,
                                   Cricotracheal Resection,
                                   Laryngotracheoplasty
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: A laryngotracheal reconstruction (LTR, laryngotracheoplasty) or cricotracheal resection (CTR) is
                                   performed in the patient with moderate-to-severe subglottic stenosis. Typically, the procedure starts with a diag-
                                   nostic bronchoscopy. In most of these patients, a tracheotomy will already be present. During the procedure, the
                                   tracheotomy tube may be switched for an anode tube, which is sutured or taped to the chest. A horizontal neck

===== PAGE 1225 =====
Laryngotracheal Reconstruction, Cricotracheal Resection, Laryngotracheoplasty                  1225

                   incision is made over the cricoid cartilage. The strap muscles are separated in the midline, and the laryngeal cartilage
                   and trachea are exposed. In an LTR a vertical incision (laryngofissure) is made through the inferior portion of the
                   thyroid cartilage, through the cricoid cartilage, and down to the tracheotomy site. Either before or after the airway
                   is exposed, costal cartilage, auricular cartilage, or thyroid cartilage will be harvested for use as a graft. The cartilage
                   graft is then sutured into the anterior airway, keeping the laryngofissure incision open. Sometimes, a posterior carti-
                   lage graft is necessary in a severely stenotic airway, and this is placed after making an incision through the posterior
                   cricoid. The initial exposure for a CTR is the same as an LTR but instead of placing a cartilage graft(s), the anterior
                   portion of the cricoid cartilage and stenotic portion of the trachea are removed and the trachea pulled superiorly and
                   sutured to the thyroid and remaining cricoid cartilages.
                   In a single-stage procedure, the ETT is removed intraop before the anterior cartilaginous incisions are closed and
                   replaced with an oral or nasal ET tube. This ETT is kept in place for 2–7 d as a stent around which the airway heals.
                   In a two-stage procedure, the tracheotomy tube is kept in place. In this circumstance, there may be a stent superior
                   to the tracheotomy tube, or a T-shaped tracheotomy tube may be used.
                   A cricoid split is most commonly performed in the NICU baby who fails extubation due to subglottic stenosis.
                   Diagnostic bronchoscopy is performed; then the baby is reintubated or the bronchoscope is left in the airway, and
                   the procedure is performed over the bronchoscope. A laryngofissure is performed but no cartilage graft placed. Typi-
                   cally, an ETT 1/2 size larger than the previously placed ETT is inserted.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Subglottic stenosis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, shoulder roll

                     Incision                Horizontal neck

                     Unique                  After the cut is made into the airway, a leak may be present, depending on position of the cuff (if
                       considerations        present).

                     Antibiotics             Clindamycin 10 mg/kg, Ampicillin/Sulbactam 50 mg/kg

                     Surgical time           Laryngotracheal reconstruction (LTR, laryngotracheoplasty), Cricotracheal reconstruction 1.5–4
                                             hours
                                             Cricoid split: 45 min

                     EBL                     5–30 mL

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Pneumothorax
                                             Bleeding
                                             Infection
                                             Stent or ETT dislodgement
                                             Residual/recurrent subglottic stenosis

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery
                     Pain score              4–6; 6–8 if costal cartilage harvested.

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–adult

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Rare

                     Etiology                ETT intubation; congenital

                     Associated              Prematurity with prolonged NICU course
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1226 =====
1226   c hap t er 12.3         Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   These procedures are performed in patients with subglottic stenosis with a lesion that is either congenital or
                                   acquired. Congenital subglottic stenosis varies with regard to the length of trachea involved and the degree of steno-
                                   sis. Segmental stenosis may occur in the region of the cricoid cartilage, midtrachea, or just above the carina. Sx are
                                   severe retractions, especially with agitation or intercurrent URI, dyspnea, and stridor. If the stenotic segment is short
                                   and severe, excision with primary anastomosis may be performed. If the involved segment is long, tracheoplasty is
                                   usually performed.
                                   Acquired subglottic stenosis occurs as a complication of prolonged tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation,
                                   most commonly in premature neonates with severe lung disease (infant respiratory distress syndrome [IRDS]). The
                                   stenotic lesion usually is limited to the level of the cricoid cartilage and is treated with the cricoid split procedure. In
                                   addition to tracheal stenosis, tracheomalacia may be present.

                                    Respiratory               Patients may be intubated and mechanically ventilated in the PICU. A variable degree of
                                                              lung disease may be present; some patients may be on minimal ventilatory support, while
                                                              others may require relatively high FiO2 and/or inflating pressures. Some patients will have
                                                              an indwelling tracheostomy tube that bypasses the stenotic lesion and may be cared for at
                                                              home.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular            Although not common, cor pulmonale with RVH may be present 2° chronic lung disease.

                                    Hematologic               Anemia is common, especially in infants with chronic lung disease.
                                                              Tests: Hct

                                    Premedication             Infants in PICU usually are receiving a regimen of sedative and analgesia drugs. These
                                                              should be continued until the patient is transported to the OR, with supplemental doses
                                                              given preop as needed. Tolerance may be present, and drug doses should be titrated to
                                                              achieve an adequate level of sedation.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                   Induction                  In intubated or trached patients with iv access, an iv induction is performed; otherwise,
                                                              a mask induction is done with inhalation agents. Care should be taken to preserve upper
                                                              airway patency, as even mild obstruction tends to exacerbate tracheal collapse. In cases
                                                              of severe obstruction, iv access should be established prior to induction and may then
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                              be followed by either inhalation induction or iv induction. Following induction, tracheal
                                                              intubation is performed with an ETT smaller than normal for age. In patients with severe
                                                              stenosis, an ETT as small as 2.5 mm may be required. A cuffed tube is recommended, and
                                                              the surgeon should be careful not to damage the cuff during the procedure. If prolonged
                                                              sedation and mechanical ventilation are planned postop, central venous access should be
                                                              considered.

                                   Maintenance                Plans for postop mechanical ventilation are discussed with the surgeon. In those patients
                                                              for whom mechanical ventilation is planned for > 24 h, high-dose opioid anesthesia can be
                                                              considered (e.g., fentanyl 20–50 mcg/kg), as well as a muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium, if
                                                              needed). A mixture of air and O2 is used to minimize the risk of airway fire.

                                   Emergence                  The majority of patients are transported to the PICU with indwelling ETT and residual
                                                              sedation, narcosis, and neuromuscular blockade. These patients should be transported
                                                              with IV sedation (propofol, benzodiazepine, or dexmedetomidine). Emergent reintubation
                                                              poses a higher risk in these patients should an accidental extubation occur.

===== PAGE 1227 =====
Choanal Atresia Repair       1227

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 24 or 22 ga × 1                      Blood loss < 30 mL
                       requirements           NS/LR @ maintenance

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes

                    Complications             Tracheal edema                           Rx: dexamethasone (0.5–1 mg/kg)
                                              Injury to neck structures:
                                                Trachea
                                                Vascular structures
                                                Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Tracheal disruption (leak)               Presents with subcutaneous emphysema of the
                                                                                       neck, face, and chest wall.
                                              Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury         May cause vocal cord dysfunction.

                    Sedation/                 Heavy sedation                           To minimize head and neck movement and tracheal
                      analgesia                                                        wound disruption while ETT is in place.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Boardman SJ, Albert DM: Single stage and multistage pediatric laryngotracheal reconstruction. Otolaryngeal Clin N Am
                        2008; 41:947.
                     2. Cotton RT: Management of subglottic stenosis. Otolaryngol Clin N Am 2000; 33(1):111.
                     3. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                     4. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.

                   Choanal Atresia Repair

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Infants born with bilateral choanal atresia typically have severe airway distress shortly following birth
                   because neonates are obligate nasal breathers. The distress resolves after the child is intubated or a McGovern nipple
                   (large nipple with cross-cuts in the end) or oral airway is positioned in the oral cavity. These infants undergo primary
                   repair of the atresia within the first few days of life. Children with unilateral choanal atresia usually do not have severe
                   respiratory distress, and thus, surgery is often postponed until a later age.
                   Intranasal repair involves opening up the atretic area with choanal dilators, urethral sounds, a microdebrider, or
                   drill. Endoscopic sinus instruments are used to view the choanae and remove the posterior nasal septum. Sometimes
                   an intranasal stent is placed. A labial approach can be used to better visualize the choanale. If a transpalatal repair
                   is performed, a Dingman mouth gag is placed in the mouth, a palatal flap is raised, and the posterior portion of the
                   hard palate and posterior septum is removed. A stent is positioned in the nose. The infant should be able to breathe
                   spontaneously through the nose at completion of either procedure.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Bilateral or unilateral choanal atresia

===== PAGE 1228 =====
1228   c hap t er 12.3       Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine; rotate bed 90–180°

                                    Incision               Intranasal or intraoral

                                    Special                Choanal dilators; Dingman mouth gag
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics            Clindamycin 10 mg/kg, Ampicillin/Sulbactam 50 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time          30 min–2 h

                                    EBL                    < 10 mL

                                    Postop care            Observation in PICU for respiratory distress

                                    Mortality              Rare

                                    Morbidity              Bleeding
                                                           CSF leak
                                                           Meningitis
                                                           Pressure necrosis to nasal ala and septum from stent
                                                           Infection
                                                           Airway obstruction if stents become malpositioned

                                    Pain score             3–6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              Newborn–young child

                                    Male:Female            1:1

                                    Incidence              Rare

                                    Etiology               Congenital

                                    Associated             Coloboma, heart disease, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, and ear deformi-
                                      conditions           ties (CHARGE) association (see Anesthetic Considerations, below).

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Because many neonates are nasal breathers, choanal atresia may present with cyanosis at rest, resolving with crying
                                   or placement of an oral airway. Unilateral atresia is usually asymptomatic; bilateral lesions usually → respiratory
                                   distress in the neonatal period, but occasionally are asymptomatic. Although choanal atresia is most commonly an
                                   isolated anomaly, it may present as part of the CHARGE association.

                                   Respiratory              Classic findings include cyanosis at rest, resolving with crying.

                                   Cardiovascular           When part of the CHARGE association, cardiac defects include tetralogy of Fallot, ASD,
                                                            VSD, PDA, AV canal, or right-side aortic arch.

                                   Neurologic               When part of the CHARGE association, a variety of CNS abnormalities may be present.
                                                            Hypoxia 2° airway obstruction may cause CNS impairment and Sz.

                                   Premedication            Repair of choanal atresia usually is performed in infancy, and premedication is not
                                                            indicated.

===== PAGE 1229 =====
Pediatric Tracheostomy         1229

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction                 Standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1). Airway obstruction may develop during induc-
                                              tion of anesthesia. Early placement of an oral airway is recommended to relieve air-
                                              way obstruction. An oral RAE ETT is preferred, especially if a transpalatal repair is planned
                                              using a Dingman mouth retractor.

                    Maintenance               Inhalational or IV anesthesia is maintained during the procedure. During the first mo of
                                              life, opioids (other than remifentanil) should be avoided generally because of the risk of
                                              postop respiratory depression. For infants undergoing repair after the first mo of life, small
                                              doses of fentanyl (1–2 mcg/kg) may be given. Muscle relaxation does not need to be main-
                                              tained following tracheal intubation.

                    Emergence                 Nasal stents placed following the repair must be secure and free of secretions prior to tra-
                                              cheal extubation. Patients must be fully awake and capable of maintaining patency of their
                                              oropharynx in the event of postop swelling and transient obstruction of the nasopharynx.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 24 or 22 ga × 1                       Blood loss is usually < 10 mL; may be greater in
                       requirements           NS/LR @ maintenance                       older infants.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1) .

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes

                    Complications             Airway obstruction                        2° obstruction or displacement of nasal stents
                                              Bleeding                                  into oral pharynx especially in older infants

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             See Intraop Complications, above.

                    Pain                      Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg po/iv              Small doses of opioid may be given iv immediately
                      management              q 6 h, or 30–40 mg/kg pr loading          postop, with special attention to avoid respiratory
                                              dose, followed by 20 mg/kg q 6 h          depression/obstruction.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 791.

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery

                   Pediatric Tracheostomy
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A tracheostomy is performed in the infant or child with upper airway obstruction (subglottic stenosis,
                   laryngeal web, etc.) or in the child in whom prolonged mechanical ventilation is anticipated. In most cases, the child
                   will already be intubated and the procedure will be performed over the ETT. In selected infants, the tracheostomy can
                   be performed with a rigid bronchoscope in the airway through which the patient is being ventilated. A midline hori-
                   zontal neck incision is made just inferior to the cricoid cartilage. The dissection is carried out in the midline until the
                   trachea is reached. In children, the tracheal incision is vertical. Stay sutures may be placed in the right and left sides of
                   the trachea on either side of the incision to facilitate replacement of the tracheotomy tube should it become displaced.
                   Alternatively, a formal tracheal stoma may be created by securing the skin flaps directly to the trachea. One method

===== PAGE 1230 =====
1230   c hap t er 12.3         Pediatric Otolaryngology

                                   of formalizing the stoma is a starplasty where the tracheal incision is made in the shape of a “+”, the skin incision an
                                   “x”, and the skin is sutured to the trachea. A large air leak will be present as soon as the tracheal incision is made.
                                   As the ETT or bronchoscope is being removed, a tracheostomy tube is inserted in the neck. The ventilation tubing
                                   is moved and connected to the tracheotomy tube, which is secured with neck sutures and/or ties around the neck.
                                   The starplasty has the advantage that in case the tracheotomy tube is dislodged accidentally, it can be fairly easily
                                   reinserted, even on the first postoperative day, providing an additional safety factor over the conventional approach.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ventilator dependence; subglottic stenosis

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine; head to anesthesia; shoulder roll; neck extended

                                    Incision                 Horizontal neck

                                    Special                  Tracheostomy hook
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Patient is draped to allow easy access to ETT. When trachea is opened, a large air leak may be
                                      considerations         present. On entering the airway, the ETT may be ruptured. Unlike adult tracheostomy tubes, pedi-
                                                             atric trachs typically do not have an “inner” cannula and often do not have a cuff.

                                    Antibiotics              Clindamycin 10 mg/kg or cefazolin 25 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time            30 min–1 h

                                    EBL                      < 10 mL

                                    Postop care              Close observation in PICU. CXR immediately following procedure to r/o pneumothorax.

                                    Mortality                Intraoperative: rare. Postop 1–3%, usually 2° tracheostomy tube plugging or dislodgement.

                                    Morbidity                Pneumothorax
                                                             Subcutaneous emphysema
                                                             Bleeding
                                                             Infection
                                                             Plugging
                                                             Skin abrasion around trach edges or trach ties in patient with short, chubby neck

                                    Pain score               3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                Newborn–adult

                                    Male:Female              1:1
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Incidence                Uncommon

                                    Etiology                 Anatomical airway obstruction; ventilatory dependence; high, spinal-cord, or head injury

                                    Associated               Prematurity; trauma
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Tracheostomy in Chapter 3.0, Otolaryngology (p. 191).
                                   Supplemental Readings
                                     1. Landsman IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 786–820.
                                     2. Olutoye OA, Watcha ME: Eyes, ears, nose and throat surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                                        5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 777–809.

===== PAGE 1231 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.4 Pediatric
                                           Cardiovascular
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Katsuhide Maeda, MD, PhD
                                           V. Mohan Reddy, MD
                                           Frank L. Hanley, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Claudia Benkwitz, MD, PhD
                                           Komal Kamra, MD
                                           M. Gail Boltz, MD
                                           Chandra Ramamoorthy, MD

===== PAGE 1232 =====
Surgery for Atrial Septal Defect (Ostium
                                   Secundum)
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Atrial septal defects (ASDs) are among the most common congenital cardiac defects. ASDs vary widely
                                   in size and location and are broadly classified as ostium secundum, ostium primum, sinus venosus, and coronary
                                   sinus types (Fig. 12.4-1). Ostium secundum defects—the most common (80%)—result from an incompletely formed
                                   or fenestrated septum primum covering the fossa ovalis. A L → R shunt results in augmented pulmonary blood flow
                                   which, if left uncorrected, may → RV failure, atrial arrhythmias, pulmonary HTN, and, rarely, pulmonary vascular
                                   occlusive disease (PVOD). In 1953, Gibbon successfully repaired an ASD using a pump-oxygenator and, in doing so,
                                   ushered in the era of open cardiac surgery.
                                   Secundum ASDs that fail to close spontaneously should be closed electively in early childhood to avoid long-term
                                   complications. Currently, ASD closure is performed through a minimally invasive midline partial sternotomy
                                   approach on CPB. A right anterolateral thoracotomy through the 4th intercostal space also provides satisfactory
                                   exposure and provides female patients with better cosmesis. After CPB and cardioplegic arrest or ventricular fibril-
                                   lation have been instituted, a right atriotomy is created, and the ASD is visualized.
                                   Repair is affected by direct suture closure or patch closure, using autologous pericardium or prosthetic material
                                   (e.g., Gore-Tex, Dacron). After the repair is completed and the atriotomy is closed, standard de-airing maneuvers
                                   are performed, the aortic cross-clamp is released, and CPB is discontinued. The chest is then closed in the stan-
                                   dard fashion.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Patent foramen ovale (PFO) in adults is becoming a common indication
                                   for device closure to avoid risk of paradoxical embolism and stroke during surgery.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: ASD; ostium secundum defect; other variants

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine or lateral decubitus (thoracotomy)

                                    Incision               Minimally invasive midline incision with limited right median sternotomy; right anterolateral thora-
                                                           cotomy (4th intercostal space): Robotic-assisted total endoscopic surgery

                                    Unique                 R → L shunt → systemic embolization
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time          Aortic cross-clamp or ventricular fibrillation time: 10–30 min
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                           Total: 2 h

                                    Closing                Routine closure with chest tube in pericardial space; temporary atrial pacing wire (older
                                      considerations       patients); possible left atrial line for monitoring

                                    EBL                    Minimal

                                    Postop care            Extubation in OR or within 1st 4 h; 24-h monitoring in ICU

                                    Mortality              Rare

                                    Morbidity              Hemorrhage
                                                           Postpericardiotomy syndrome
                                                           Atrial arrhythmias

                                    Pain score             6–8

                            1232

===== PAGE 1233 =====
Surgery for Atrial Septal Defect (Ostium Secundum)          1233

                                Figure 12.4-1. Location of ASDs, numbered in decreasing order of frequency: 1 =
                                secundum; 2 = primum; 3 = sinus venosus; 4 = coronary sinus type. IVC = inferior
                                vena cava; PT = pulmonary trunk; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior vena cava.
                                (Reproduced with permission from the Mayo Foundation for Education and Research.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Neonate–adults

                     Male:Female            1:2

                     Incidence              10–15% of congenital heart defects

                     Etiology               Unknown; sometimes associated with syndromes such as Holt-Oram.

                     Associated             ASD may coexist with nearly any of the other recognized congenital cardiac anomalies but is more
                       conditions           commonly associated with pulmonary stenosis (10%), partial anomalous pulmonary venous return
                                            (7%), VSD (5%), PDA (3%), and mitral stenosis (2%). ASDs are also part of other malformations,
                                            including tricuspid atresia, total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC), and mitral
                                            atresia.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Pathophysiology          Although the septum secundum ASD is the most common one (~80% of all ASDs), periop
                                             management varies little among all types of ASDs (including ostium primum, sinus veno-
                                             sus, and coronary sinus types). One principle guideline in all L → R shunts is the estima-
                                             tion of shunt flow: Qp:Qs. The size of the defect and relative compliances of both ven-
                                             tricles are the two main factors determining the degree of shunting at the atrial level and
                                             thereby ultimately pulmonary blood flow (Qp). Patients are generally asymptomatic until
                                             the Qp:Qs ratio exceeds 3.0. As the shunt flow increases, Sx of pulmonary overcirculation
                                             may develop (e.g., feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, tachypnea at rest, frequent URIs,
                                             and arrhythmias related to atrial dilatation). L → R shunt → ↑ pulmonary blood flow (Qp)
                                             → ↑ PA pressures → ↑ PVR → RV overload → RV failure. The larger the area of the defect,
                                             the greater the shunt.

===== PAGE 1234 =====
1234   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Cardiovascular             Most infants with ASDs are asymptomatic. ASDs are detected on cardiac ausculta-
                                     and                      tion (fixed splitting of S2) or sometimes during neurological workup for TIAs or strokes
                                     respiratory              secondary to paradoxical emboli. Depending on the degree of shunting (Qp/Qs), young
                                                             children may have h/o frequent URIs. Cyanosis is rare and indicates shunt reversal and
                                                             development of pulmonary HTN. Although almost 90% of small secundum ASDs close
                                                             spontaneously in the first year of life, surgical repair is usually recommended between
                                                             3 and 5 years of age as these patients are at risk for paradoxical embolism, stroke, bacterial
                                                             endocarditis, and ultimately CHF. For some patients (depending on age, size, and location
                                                             of the ASD), endovascular closure in the cath lab, or more recently with hybrid procedures,
                                                             may be suitable alternatives, with both obviating the need for CPB.
                                                             Tests: EKG: normal or RVH. CXR: cardiomegaly and ↑ pulmonary vascular markings.
                                                             ECHO. TEE: essential for locating and estimating size of defect, other valvular abnor-
                                                             malities, and identification of pulmonary vein anatomy. Cardiac CT may be indicated for
                                                             delineation of the pulmonary veins in sinus venous ASDs because of the association of
                                                             anomalous pulmonary venous return.

                                   Laboratory                Hb/Hct; T&C

                                   Premedication             Patients > 8 mo old may benefit from midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po 20 min before induction.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Most of these patients are candidates for fast-tracking—the practice of extubating
                                   cardiac patients in the OR or within 4 h of completion of surgery. To achieve this goal, the anesthetic technique must
                                   be adjusted to allow for early extubation.
                                   Criteria for fast-tracking include patients > 4 mo of age, short CPB run, stable hemodynamic profile, minimal ino-
                                   tropic support, normal acid-base status, and adequate surgical hemostasis. Patients who are pacemaker-dependent
                                   are not suitable candidates for fast-tracking. Generally, patients selected for fast-tracking have undergone repair of
                                   a secundum ASD, VSD (no evidence of postop pulmonary HTN), bidirectional Glenn and Fontan procedures, or a
                                   RV → PA conduit change. For patients with a single ventricle, resumption of spontaneous ventilation decreases
                                   intrathoracic pressure thereby increasing venous return and improving CO.

                                   Induction                 Following inhalation induction using sevoflurane (O2/N2O), an iv is placed and intubation
                                                             facilitated with rocuronium (0.6–1 mg/kg). After ET intubation, an arterial line is placed
                                                             for close BP monitoring.
                                                             Fast-track: Inhalation induction (sevoflurane ± N2O) is followed by placement of a PIV.
                                                             Fentanyl (2–5 mcg/kg) and a muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 0.6–1 mg/kg) are admin-
                                                             istered, and the airway is secured. Subsequently, an arterial line is placed. For patients
                                                             who are not candidates for regional anesthesia (e.g., parent preference, spine abnormal-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                             ity, bleeding disorder), intravenous techniques are used (e.g., remifentanil 0.1–0.4 mcg/
                                                             kg/min). Because most patients have good myocardial function, propofol (100–200 mcg/
                                                             kg/min) may also be used, often with ketamine (20–50 mcg/kg/min). Propofol may also be
                                                             used after separation from CPB and in transport to the ICU, usually at a lower dose (25–75
                                                             mcg/kg/min), weaned, and discontinued just prior to extubation.
                                                             Non-fast-track: An inhalation induction with sevoflurane ±N2O is usually well tolerated.
                                                             Then, iv access is established and intubation facilitated by muscle relaxant (rocuronium
                                                             0.6–1 mg/kg) and supplemental fentanyl. For patients who are not candidates for fast-
                                                             tracking, the standard anesthetic is fentanyl 20–40 mcg/kg in divided doses with supple-
                                                             mental isoflurane before and during CPB. Additional midazolam (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) may be
                                                             administered to reduce chance of recall and awareness. An iv induction should be used in
                                                             patients with significant pulmonary HTN and/or RV failure. iv induction can be accom-
                                                             plished with etomidate 0.1–0.3 mg/kg or ketamine 0.5–1 mg/kg, followed by a muscle
                                                             relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 1 mg/kg).

===== PAGE 1235 =====
Surgery for Atrial Septal Defect (Ostium Secundum)           1235

                    Maintenance        For maintenance of anesthesia, inhaled agents, iv agents, regional anesthetic, or a com-
                                       bination may be used. N2O is turned off after induction to avoid expansion of any VAE.
                                       In patients with pulmonary HTN, RV failure and/or other medical conditions requiring
                                       postop mechanical ventilation, a high-dose narcotic technique may be appropriate (e.g.,
                                       fentanyl 50–150 mcg/kg ± inhalation agent).

                    Emergence          If the choice is made to extubate the patient receiving remifentanil in the OR, check level
                                       of paralysis and reverse as appropriate; isoflurane is terminated during skin closure, and
                                       the remifentanil is turned off last, when the dressing is applied. Extubation is performed
                                       once the patient meets standard criteria (e.g., –25 cm H2O NIF, spontaneous ventilation,
                                       adequate sat, hemodynamic stability, none or minimal inotropic support). Because remi-
                                       fentanil has an extremely short half-life, and in the absence of regional anesthetic, it is
                                       necessary that a long-acting opioid (e.g., hydromorphone 10–15 mcg/kg) is administered
                                       in a timely fashion to ensure postop analgesia. Propofol 25–75 mcg/kg/min ± remifentanil
                                       may be used for transport. Extubation is then performed in the ICU. Vasodilators are usu-
                                       ally not required for BP control. O2, bag, mask, airway equipment, and emergency drugs
                                       should be available during transport.

                    Blood and fluid    IV: appropriate for patient’s size ×   NB: It is extremely critical to avoid iv air bubbles
                       requirements    1–2                                    in all patients with intracardiac shunts. Meticulous
                                       LR @ TKO                               attention must be paid to clearing the iv tubing and
                                       Blood warmer                           stopcocks of any bubbles to avoid paradoxical air
                                       3 for air bubbles                      embolism and possible stroke. Have blood available
                                       T&C 1 U PRBC.                          in the OR. Blood transfusion may be required in
                                                                              patients < 10 kg.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. D-1).        ABG, electrolytes, and Hct should be checked as
                                       Cerebral oximetry                      needed during the procedure. Place at least two
                                       O2 sat probes (two sites)              O2 probes to ensure readings during critical times.
                                       Arterial line                          Avoid dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arterial
                                       CVP line                               lines (inaccurate 2° spasm post-CPB). Femoral
                                       Urinary catheter                       arterial line may be used. Double-lumen CVP in IJ
                                       ACT monitoring                         preferable.
                                       TEE                                    TEE monitoring is used to assess anatomy and
                                                                              repair. On CPB, if the aorta is not cross-clamped,
                                                                              monitor for intracardiac air.

                    Positioning        3 and pad pressure points
                                       3 eyes

                    Pre-CPB            Heparinization (200–400 U/kg)          Confirm that antibiotics have been given 30–60
                                       3 ACT > 480 sec                        min before skin incision and repeat q 4–6 h per

                                                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery
                                       3 NMB                                  protocol. If a regional technique is used, allow for a
                                       3 UO                                   minimum of 60 min between needle placement and
                                                                              heparinization.

                    CPB                Ventilation stopped                    The patient is not actively cooled for secundum
                                       Hypothermia                            ASD closure. Temperature is allowed to drift to
                                       3 sufficient analgesia/sedation        33–34°C during CPB. Supplemental fentanyl/mid-
                                       3 adequate flow and pressure           azolam may be handed to the perfusionist and
                                       d
                                        uring CPB                            administered directly into the CPB circuit.
                                       3 face for venous congestion
                                       3 ABG and ACT
                                       3 UO
                                       3 blood availability

===== PAGE 1236 =====
1236   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Transition off             Rewarming                                  Surgeon will de-air heart, and this maneuver is
                                      CPB                     3 sufficient analgesia/sedation            monitored with TEE.
                                                              Vasoactive infusions started at            Observe inflation of both lungs. Turn on vaporizer.
                                                              34–35°C.                                   Vasoactive infusions (e.g., dopamine 3–5 mcg/kg/
                                                              Flush lines.                               min) may be started but are not always necessary in
                                                              Zero transducers.                          uncomplicated cases.
                                                              Suction ETT.
                                                              Resume ventilation.
                                                              3 ABG

                                   Post-CPB                   Reversal of heparin with protamine         1 mg of protamine will reverse 100 U of residual
                                                              3 UO                                       heparin.
                                                              ± Modified ultrafiltration (MUF)           MUF uses the CPB machine to remove excess water
                                                                                                         and inflammatory mediators. It has been shown to
                                                                                                         transiently ↓ postop edema and improve cardiopul-
                                                                                                         monary function. This technique is not routinely
                                                                                                         performed at Stanford.

                                   Complications              Air embolism (VAE)                         Potential for paradoxical embolization
                                                              Supraventricular dysrhythmias              Likely 2° atriotomy
                                                              Heart block
                                                              Ventricular dysfunction

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Bleeding

                                   Tests                      ABG
                                                              Electrolytes; Hct
                                                              CXR

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, et al: Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 7th edition.
                                       Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007.
                                    2. Bacha EZ, Hijazi AM: Hybrid procedures in pediatric cardiac surgery. Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular surgery.
                                       Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Annual 2005: 78–85.
                                    3. Boltz MG, Hammer GB, Andropoulos DB: Regional anesthesia and postoperative pain management. In: Andropoulos DB,
                                       Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds. Anesthesia for congenital heart disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell: 2010, 356–70.
                                    4. Chaudhary V, Chauhan S, Choudhury M, Kiran U, Vasdev S, Talwar S: Parasternal intercostals block with ropivacaine for
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       postoperative analgesia in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a double-blind, randomized, controlled study.
                                       J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2012; 26:439–42.
                                    5. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. Anesth for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden MA: 2008,
                                       167–251.
                                    6. Gadhinglajkar S, Sreedhar R, Jayakumar K, Misra M, Ganesh S, Mathew T: Role of intraoperative echocardiography in
                                       surgical correction of the superior sinus venous atrial septal defect. Ann Card Anesth 2010; 13:59–63.
                                    7. Peterson KL, DeCampli WM, Pike NA, Robbins RC, Reitz BA: A report of 220 cases of regional anesthesia in pediatric cardiac
                                       surgery. Anesth Analg 2000; 90:1014–19.
                                    8. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                                    9. Torracca L, Ismeno G, Alfieri O: Totally endoscopic computer-enhanced atrial septal defect closure in six patients. Ann
                                       Thorac Surg 2001; 72(4):1354–7.
                                   10. Walker SG: Anesthesia for left-to-right shunt lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, Mossad EB, eds. Anesthesia
                                       for Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Chichester, UK: 2010, 373–97.
                                   11. Wilson NJ, Smith J, Prommete B, et al: Transcatheter closure of secundum atrial septal defects with the amplatzer septal
                                       occluder in adults and children-follow-up closure rates, degree of mitral regurgitation and evolution of arrhythmias. Heart
                                       Lung Circ 2008; 17(4):318–24.

===== PAGE 1237 =====
Surgery for Atrioventricular Canal Defect       1237

                   Surgery for Atrioventricular Canal Defect
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Atrioventricular (A-V) canal defects comprise a spectrum of congenital cardiac anomalies stemming
                   from the embryonic maldevelopment of endocardial cushions. This leads to the absence of septal tissue immediately
                   above and below the level of the A-V valves and defects in the A-V valves in continuity with these septal defects.
                   Partial A-V canal defects (or ostium primum atrial septal defects) involve the atrial septum and mitral valve,
                   whereas complete A-V canal defects involve the atrial and ventricular septa and have a common atrioventricular
                   valve. Intermediate or transitional A-V canal have varying degree of pathology between the above two common pat-
                   terns. Pathophysiologically, these defects result in L → R shunting at the atrial and/or ventricular levels, leading to
                   pulmonary HTN and CHF. A-V valvular insufficiency is also frequently observed with these defects, contributing to
                   the early development of CHF.
                   Palliative repair of A-V canal defects consists of pulmonary artery banding (Fig. 12.4-2) to reduce excessive pulmo-
                   nary blood flow. Palliation is rare and is reserved for very small infants with complicating conditions, such as RSV and

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery

                               Figure 12.4-2. Placement of pulmonary artery band. PA = pulmonary artery; Ao =
                               aorta; MPA = main pulmonary artery; LPA = left pulmonary artery; LA = left atrial.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Kaiser LR, Kron IL, Spray TL, eds: Mastery of
                               Cardiothoracic Surgery. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1238 =====
1238   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   other pneumonias. Total correction is now performed routinely, even in neonates. Repair consists of the closure of atrial
                                   and ventricular septal defects (VSDs) with closure of the cleft in the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve and repair of asso-
                                   ciated defects, such as a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or secundum atrial septal defect (ASD). The septal defects may be
                                   repaired with either a “two-patch technique,” consisting of a Dacron or pericardial patch on the ventricular septum and
                                   pericardial patch on the atrial septum, or a single patch (pericardium) covering both ASDs and VSDs. A modified single-
                                   patch technique where the A-V valve is plastered down to the ventricular septum is currently used by some surgeons.
                                   Partial A-V canal defects: Exposure is obtained through a standard median sternotomy. CPB is instituted with
                                   aortic cross-clamping and cardioplegic arrest. Through a right atriotomy, the mitral valve cleft is sutured. A pericar-
                                   dial patch is placed across the top of the ventricular septum, around the coronary sinus orifice, and along the free
                                   edge of the superior portion of the ASD. The atriotomy is closed and the aorta unclamped after de-airing. The patient
                                   is rewarmed and weaned from bypass.
                                   Complete A-V canal defects: Following median sternotomy, CPB is instituted with aortic cross-clamping and car-
                                   dioplegic arrest. In the single-patch technique, one patch is used to close both the ASD and VSD components. The
                                   anterior and posterior bridging leaflets often are divided and resuspended to the patch, thereby creating two separate
                                   valves. The cleft in the left AV valve is usually closed. If AV valve regurgitation is present, repair is undertaken. In the
                                   two-patch technique, two separate patches are used to close the ASD and VSD, and the common AV valve is sand-
                                   wiched in between the two patches. Repair of AV valve is the same in either technique. Closure of the right atrium,
                                   de-airing, aortic unclamping, rewarming, and resuscitation of the heart are commenced, and CPB is discontinued.
                                   Closure proceeds in the standard fashion. In ~5% of patients with complete A-V canal defects, tetralogy of Fallot
                                   (TOF) or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) has to be addressed surgically.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: A-V canal defects (complete, intermediate, or partial); endocardial cushion defects

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Partial A-V Canal Defect                           Complete A-V Canal Defect

                                    Position                  Supine                                             ⇐

                                    Incision                  Median sternotomy/right anterolateral              Standard median sternotomy
                                                              thoracotomy

                                    Unique                    None                                               Repair performed through a right atriotomy;
                                      considerations                                                             no ventriculotomies required.

                                    Antibiotics               Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h                           ⇐

                                    Surgical time             Aortic cross-clamp: 30–40 min                      Aortic cross-clamp: 60–80 min
                                                              Total: 1.5–2 h                                     Total: 2.5–3 h

                                    Closing                   Chest tube in pericardial space; temporary         ⇐
                                      considerations          ventricular pacing wire; possibly right or left
                                                              atrial line for monitoring
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    EBL                       Moderate                                           ⇐

                                    Postop care               ICU for 1–2 d, with 12- to 24-h assisted venti-    1- to 3-d assisted ventilation; pulmonary HTN
                                                              lation; minimal need for inotropes.                protocol, including hyperventilation and seda-
                                                                                                                 tion; need for pulmonary vasodilators (e.g.,
                                                                                                                 NO) is uncommon; use of inotropes for ad-
                                                                                                                 equate CO. Avoid excessive volume to prevent
                                                                                                                 distension and mitral valve regurgitation.

                                    Mortality                 0–1%                                               1–2%

                                    Morbidity                 Transient heart block                              Pulmonary vasospasm
                                                              Atrial dysrhythmias                                Right heart dysfunction
                                                              Hemorrhage                                         Mitral valve regurgitation
                                                              Infection                                          Low CO
                                                                                                                 Heart block/atrial dysrhythmias
                                                                                                                 Residual VSD
                                                                                                                 Hemorrhage

                                    Pain score                6–10                                               6–8

===== PAGE 1239 =====
Surgery for Atrioventricular Canal Defect        1239

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range         1–20 yr (usually 2–3 yr)                        2–6 mo (occasionally older; rarely, adults)

                     Male:Female       1:1                                             ⇐

                     Incidence         0.5–1% of congenital heart defects              ⇐

                     Etiology          Down syndrome: Rare, in patients with partial   Commonly associated with Down syndrome
                                       A-V canal defect                                (75% in patients with complete A-V canal defect)

                     Associated        Left A-V valve insufficiency                    Pulmonary HTN, left A-V valve insufficiency,
                       conditions                                                      minor associated cardiac anomalies (e.g., PDA
                                                                                       or ASD); major associated anomalies (e.g.,
                                                                                       TOF, LVOTO)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Pathophysiology     A-V canal defects may be partial, transitional, or complete. The partial A-V canal has no
                                        interventricular communication and has an ostium primum ASD. There is often a cleft in
                                        the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve → MR. The complete A-V canal has communica-
                                        tions at both the atrial and ventricular levels with a single A-V valve that is regurgitant.
                                        The transitional AVC has a pathology in between the 2 ends of the spectrum. The degree of
                                        L → R shunting depends on the size of the defect, the pressure gradient between the cham-
                                        bers, and the PVR/SVR. Patients with large L → R shunts are at risk of developing pulmo-
                                        nary HTN, requiring early surgical correction.

                    Respiratory         3 for pulmonary congestion, frequent URIs, tachypnea, diaphoresis on feeding, FTT. Pul-
                                        monary HTN can be present in patients with partial or complete A-V canal defects.
                                        Tests: CXR: enlarged heart + increased pulmonary markings

                    Cardiovascular      Complete A-V canal → CHF and biventricular failure.
                                        Tests: ECG: RAE, RVE; ECHO diagnostic; rarely cardiac cath may be indicated to assess PVR.

                    Down syndrome       A-V canal defects account for 40% of cardiac defects in the Down syndrome patient. These
                                        patients are at risk of atlantoaxial instability (20%); therefore, avoid excessive flexion-
                                        extension of the head and neck. Additional airway considerations (subglottic stenosis, large
                                        tongue, hypotonia) make these patients unsuitable for fast-tracking and early extubation.
                                        Furthermore, trisomy 21 patients are more prone to developing PVOD/pulmonary HTN
                                        resulting in an increase in the PVR/SVR ratio with the possibility of developing bidirec-
                                        tional shunting or, as a late finding, shunt reversal (R → L).

                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                    Laboratory          See ASD, p. 1234.

                    Premedication       Midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction          In children with small defects, no severe MR, or in the absence of PVOD, a mask induction
                                       with sevoflurane in air and O2 is acceptable. Otherwise, an iv induction with fentanyl provides
                                       more stable hemodynamics. If the iv is in place, ketamine 1–2 mg/kg or fentanyl 5–10 mcg/
                                       kg and rocuronium 1 mg/kg may be used. Verify ETT position (see p. D-2). In children with
                                       Down syndrome, anticipate difficult airway and atlantoaxial instability. Excessive neck flexion
                                       should be avoided in this population. The non-Down partial A-V canal patients may be candi-
                                       dates for early extubation if the intracardiac defects are small and surgery was uncomplicated.
                                       In this case, induction and maintenance regimes should be tailored accordingly (see ASD).

===== PAGE 1240 =====
1240   c ha p t er 12.4   Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Maintenance         Air-oxygen with volatile anesthetic and narcotics is the standard. In patients requiring
                                                       postop mechanical ventilation, fentanyl 50–100 mcg/kg total, rocuronium prn, and mid-
                                                       azolam (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) ± volatile agent may be used.

                                   Emergence           Patients undergoing repair of complete A-V canal defects are seldom suitable for fast-
                                                       tracking. On conclusion of procedure, the patient is taken to CVICU, intubated, ventilated,
                                                       sedated, and monitored, with emergency drugs and airway equipment immediately available.

                                   Blood and fluid     IV: 22–24 ga × 2
                                      requirements     LR @ TKO
                                                       Blood products

                                   Monitoring          See ASD, p. 1235.
                                                       TEE                                   TEE is used to assess left A-V valve regurgitation,
                                                                                             valvular function, residual shunt, and ventricular
                                                                                             function.

                                   CPB                 Management of CPB is discussed in     In the immediate post-CPB period, TEE exam is
                                                       Intraoperative Considerations for     valuable for evaluation of ventricular function and
                                                       ASD, p. 1235.                         residual mitral valve regurgitation.

                                   Transition off      3 rewarming                           Surgeon will de-air heart, and this maneuver is mon-
                                      CPB              3 sufficient analgesia/hypnosis       itored with TEE.
                                                       3 vasoactive infusions started at    Turn on vaporizer.
                                                          34–35°C                            Vasoactive infusions may be started but are not
                                                       3 Flush lines                         always necessary in uncomplicated cases.
                                                       3 Zero transducers                    Dopamine 3–5 mcg/kg/min, milrinone 0.5 mcg/kg/min
                                                       3 Suction ETT                         Observe inflation of both lungs. In patients with
                                                       3 Resume ventilation                  PVOD, there is a significant potential for pulmonary
                                                                                             HTN—be ready to assist with ventilatory measures,
                                                                                             ± pharmacological interventions. →
                                                                                             NO or milrinone (> reduction of PVR vs. SVR).

                                   Complications       Air embolism                          Avoid air embolism in A-V canal patients (potential
                                                                                             for shunt reversal → paradoxical embolization).
                                                       A-V block, ventricular dysfunction    A-V block may be temporary 2° edema and/or car-
                                                                                             dioplegic arrest. Permanent injury can occur to the
                                                                                             conduction system at the A-V node or bundle of His
                                                                                             with repair of the VSD. Temporary atrial and ven-
                                                                                             tricular pacing wires are placed.
                                                       Persistent bleeding
                                                       Pulmonary HTN                         Ventilatory measures for managing PHTN aim to
                                                                                             ↓ PVR independently of SVR. A combination of
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                             hyperventilation (PaCO2 20–30 mm Hg), alkalosis
                                                                                             (pH ~7.5–7.6), high FiO2, PaO2 > 60 mm Hg, and low
                                                                                             PIP/PEEP usually achieve this goal. Pharmacological
                                                                                             measures such as inhaled NO, prostacyclins, phos-
                                                                                             phodiesterase inhibitors, as well as endothelin antag-
                                                                                             onists, may be necessary to ↓ PVR in select patients.
                                                                                             High PEEP or TV → ↑ intrathoracic pressure,
                                                                                             thereby ↓ systemic venous return, while at the same
                                                                                             time ↑ RV afterload, both of which could be detri-
                                                                                             mental in the setting of pulm HTN.
                                                                                             Since control of ventilation is the most reliable way
                                                                                             to manipulate PVR, ventilatory measures represent
                                                                                             a key concept of anesthetic management of cardiac
                                                                                             lesions in which balancing PVR over SVR is crucial
                                                                                             (e.g., large VSD, CAVC, truncus arteriosus).

===== PAGE 1241 =====
Surgery for Ventricular Septal Defect            1241

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications           Residual VSD/ASD
                                            AV valve regurgitation

                    Tests                   TEE                                          Analysis of postrepair function is best done by TEE.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, et al. eds: Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 7th
                        edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007.
                     2. Bacha EA, Hijazi ZM: Hybrid procedures in pediatric cardiac surgery. Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular surgery.
                        Pediatr Cardiac Surg Annu 2005: 78–85.
                     3. Boltz MG, Hammer GB, Andropoulos DB: Regional anesthesia and postoperative pain management. In: Andropoulos DB,
                        Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds: Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2010, 356–70.
                     4. Diaz LK: Anesthesia and postoperative analgesia in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Pediatric Drugs 2006; 8:223–33.
                     5. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. In: Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA:
                        2008, 167–251.
                     6. El-Morsy GZ, El-Deeb A, El-Desouky T, et al: Can thoracic paravertebral block replace thoracic epidural block in pediatric
                        cardiac surgery? A randomized blinded study. Ann Card Anesth 2012; 15:259–63.
                     7. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Atrial septal defect. In: Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty
                        DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 800–49.
                     8. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                     9. Walker SG: Anesthesia for left-to-right shunt lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, Mossad EB, eds. Anesthesia
                        for Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Chichester, UK: 2010, 373–97.

                   Surgery for Ventricular Septal Defect
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common congenital cardiac anomaly. VSDs can occur any-
                   where in the interventricular septum (Fig. 12.4-3). One of the most common locations is the perimembranous (cono-
                   ventricular) in the region of membranous septum near the tricuspid and aortic valves. Supracristal (subarterial) defects
                   are common in the Pacific Rim population. Muscular defects occur in the inlet, trabecular, or outlet muscular septum.
                   A-V canal defects are present under the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. Physiologically, these defects result in L → R
                   shunting in proportion to the defect size. Untreated, this defect can → RV volume overload and CHF in infancy and
                   irreversible pulmonary HTN later in life. As PVR rises, shunt reversal to a R → L shunt can occur, producing hypox-
                   emia and cyanosis; this is known as Eisenmenger’s syndrome and occurs in ~10% of untreated, nonrestrictive VSDs
                   (rare). Moderate-to-large VSDs that remain open > 6 mo of age should be closed. Severe, intractable CHF in infants
                   refractory to medical therapy (e.g., diuretics, digoxin), or ↑ PVR in infants > 6 mo are indications for earlier VSD repair.

                                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                   Lillehei et al. performed the first successful VSD repairs using normothermic cross-circulation in 1955. Kirklin sub-
                   sequently described successful VSD closure using extracorporeal circulation in 1957. VSD repair is performed now
                   through a median sternotomy on CPB with bicaval cannulation. Deep hypothermia (18°C) with circulatory arrest is
                   used in neonates < 1800 g to facilitate repair. After CPB and cardioplegic arrest have been instituted, a right atriotomy
                   is created, and the VSD is visualized by retracting the tricuspid valve leaflets. The VSD is then closed with a patch (e.g.,
                   pericardium, Gore-Tex, Dacron), with care being taken not to place sutures through the nearby conduction fiber bun-
                   dles or the aortic valve. After the repair is completed and the atriotomy is closed, standard de-airing maneuvers are per-
                   formed, the aortic cross-clamp is released, and CPB is discontinued. The chest is then closed in the standard fashion.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Supracristal defects may be more easily exposed through a pulmonary
                   arteriotomy, while some inferiorly located muscular VSDs may be better accessed through a right ventriculotomy.
                   Multiple VSDs or “Swiss cheese” ventricular septum can be a challenging surgical problem. Many can be closed with
                   the approaches described above. Some may require a combined surgical and device closure. Palliative pulmonary
                   artery banding may be required in Swiss cheese muscular VSD, with the hope that many of the VSDs may close
                   spontaneously. At a 2nd stage, the remaining VSDs are closed and the PA band is removed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: VSD

===== PAGE 1242 =====
1242   chap t er 12.4          Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                               Figure 12.4-3. The right ventricular free wall has been resected to show the VSDs:
                                               conoventricular = perimembranous; conal septal = outlet septal (subpulmonary); inlet
                                               septal = A-V canal type. Muscular (trabecular) defects may be midmuscular, anterior, or
                                               apical. The penetrating bundle is closely related to the inferior margin of the conoventricular
                                               defect and diverges away from this margin into the trabecular septomarginalis beneath
                                               the muscle of Lancisi. (Reproduced with permission from Kaiser LR, Kron IL, Spray TL,
                                               eds: Mastery of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1998.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine

                                    Incision                 Median sternotomy

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time            Aortic cross-clamp: 15–45 min
                                                             Total: 2–3 h

                                    Closing                  Routine closure with chest tube in the pericardial space; temporary ventricular pacing wire; pos-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                      considerations         sibly right/left atrial and/or pulmonary arterial lines for monitoring

                                    EBL                      Minimal-to-moderate

                                    Postop care              Extubation in OR or within several h; 24-h monitoring in ICU.

                                    Mortality                ≤ 1%

                                    Morbidity                Hemorrhage
                                                             Low CO
                                                             Atrial dysrhythmias
                                                             Complete A-V heart block
                                                             Residual shunting; tricuspid regurgitation

                                    Pain score               6–8

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                Neonate – adult

                                    Male:Female              1:1

===== PAGE 1243 =====
Surgery for Ventricular Septal Defect          1243

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence              20% of congenital heart defects; 2/1000 births

                     Associated             PDA (6%); coarctation of the aorta (5%); congenital AS (2%); congenital mitral valve disease (2%); also
                       conditions           part of other malformations, including TOF, TGA, DORV, tricuspid atresia; truncus arteriosus; others

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Pathophysiology          VSDs are classified by their location. Patients may be asymptomatic or may present with
                                             varying degrees of CHF ± pulmonary HTN, depending on the age of the patient, size of
                                             the VSD, and the flow across the VSD. Small VSDs, in which the flow is related to the size
                                             of the defect and in which there may be significant pressure gradient across the defect, are
                                             considered restrictive. These may close spontaneously in early childhood. Large VSDs in
                                             which the degree of L → R shunting is independent of the size and only determined by the
                                             PVR/SVR ratio are described as “nonrestrictive.” Patients with large VSDs present with
                                             CHF and other signs of pulmonary overcirculation once their Qp:Qs > 2.0. Cyanosis indi-
                                             cates pulmonary HTN and shunt reversal (Eisenmenger’s syndrome).

                    Cardiovascular           Similar to patients with other L → R shunting lesions (ASD, ACV). 3 for signs and Sx of
                      and                    CHF and pulmonary overcirculation (include: tachypnea, frequent URIs, sweating dur-
                      respiratory            ing feeding, FTT, reduced exercise tolerance, fatigue). Children with small VSDs may be
                                             asymptomatic. A holosystolic murmur may be present (particularly in restrictive defects)
                                             and can be heard best at the left lower sternal border. Cyanosis is absent unless there is
                                             R → L shunting (suggesting pulmonary HTN).
                                             Tests: EKG, CXR, ECHO. If pulmonary NTH is suspected, cardiac catheterization is per-
                                             formed for measurement of PA pressures. If PA pressures are elevated, O2 and NO respon-
                                             siveness is tested. VSDs may be closed surgically, via a device in the catheter (in the absence
                                             of pulmonary HTN), or with a hybrid procedural approach.

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct: electrolytes (children on diuretic, digoxin Rx), others as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication            Midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po may be useful.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: The anesthetic management of a patient with VSD (without pulmonary HTN and CHF) is
                   similar to the patient with ASD. These patients may be candidates for fast-tracking and early extubation. Refer to fast-

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                   tracking in ASD section (see p. 1234). For patients with unrestrictive VSDs, avoid factors that ↓ PVR and ↑ shunt flow
                   (i.e., high FiO2, hyperventilation, ↓ pH). This will compromise DBP and thereby CPP. For patients who are not candi-
                   dates for fast-tracking, the standard anesthetic is fentanyl 20–40 mcg/kg in divided doses with supplemental isoflurane
                   before and during CPB. Additional midazolam (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) may be administered to prevent recall and awareness.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: appropriate for patient size × 1–2      Minimize administration of iv fluids. Both ventri-
                       requirements          LR @ TKO                                    cles are volume-overloaded in large VSDs.
                                             Blood warmer
                                             T&C

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                             Arterial line
                                             Surgical LA line                            A transthoracic LA line may be placed by the sur-
                                             Surgical RA/PA line (to assess for          geon if there is concern about postop mitral valve
                                             elevated PA pressures)                      and LV dysfunction.
                                             Urinary catheter                            In the immediate post-CPB period, TEE exam is
                                             ACT monitoring                              valuable for evaluation of residual VSD and ven-
                                             TEE                                         tricular function.

===== PAGE 1244 =====
1244   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Pre-CPB                     See ASD (see p. 1235).

                                   CPB                         See ASD (see p. 1235).                    Most VSDs are closed under mild/moderate hypo-
                                                                                                         thermic CPB (28–32°C).

                                   Transition off              See ASD (see p. 1235).
                                      CPB

                                   Post-CPB                    Maintenance of adequate filling
                                                               pressure (LA = 5–10 mm Hg)
                                                               Temporary pacemaker wires                 Placed in patients with conduction disturbances;
                                                                                                         pacemaker wires are placed routinely but may not
                                                                                                         be connected to a pacemaker.
                                                               TEE                                       3 for residual shunt and ventricular and valvular
                                                               Pulmonary HTN                             function, residual air.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Persistent bleeding                       May occur particularly after perimembranous VSD
                                                               Heart block                               closure
                                                               Ventricular dysfunction/failure           Especially in patients with ventriculotomy Dx: TEE.
                                                               JET                                       Evaluate for need of esmolol, amiodarone, procain-
                                                                                                         amide, 3 for cooling, paralysis.

                                   Tests                       ABGs
                                                               Electrolytes; Hct; coags prn
                                                               CXR

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russell L, Mossad EB, eds. Anesthesia for
                                        Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008, 167–251.
                                     2. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Ventricular septal defect. In: Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty
                                        DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 850–910.
                                     3. Walker SG: Anesthesia for left-to-right shunt lesions. Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, Mossad EB, eds. Anesthesia for
                                        Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Chichester, UK: 2010, 373–97.

                                   Surgery for Patent Ductus Arteriosus
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) usually is located between the proximal descending thoracic aorta and
                                   the main PA. Pathophysiologically, this results in L → R shunting and augmented pulmonary blood flow, which, if
                                   left untreated, may lead to pulmonary HTN and CHF. A relatively common congenital heart anomaly, comprising
                                   12–15% of CHDs, PDA was first successfully ligated by Gross in 1938. Early administration of indomethacin may
                                   promote ductal closure in many premature infants, obviating surgical intervention; however, this mode of therapy
                                   generally is contraindicated in the setting of renal insufficiency or intracranial bleeding.
                                   Surgical ductal closure is indicated for significant L → R shunting. The ductus usually can be exposed via a small,
                                   left, posterolateral thoracotomy in the 4th intercostal space or via the thoracoscopic approach. The ductus is iden-
                                   tified and dissected with special care taken to avoid injury to the phrenic and left recurrent laryngeal nerves (Fig.
                                   12.4-4). The ductus is interrupted with a surgical clip in neonates; in older children, the ductus is double- or triple-
                                   ligated or divided between vascular clamps, and the ends are oversewn. A small thoracostomy tube is placed, and
                                   the thoracotomy is closed. The thoracostomy tube is removed in the OR immediately after the chest is closed or a
                                   few hours later.

===== PAGE 1245 =====
Surgery for Patent Ductus Arteriosus                   1245

                                                                                                                            Right subclavian artery
                                      Right pulmonary artery                                            Ascending aorta               Right common carotid artery
                                                                                               Right pulmonary artery                            Left common carotid artery
                          Superior                                        Aorta                Right pulmonary vein                                     Left subclavian artery
                          vena cava                                                                                                                      Patent ductus
                                                                          Patent ductus
                                                                          arteriosus                                                                     arteriosus
                  Pulmonary                                                 Left pulmonary                                                               Descending aorta
                  artery trunk                                              artery                                                                       Left pulmonary artery
                   Pulmonary                                                                        Right
                   valve                                                                            atrium
                                                                                              Pulmonary
                                                                                              artery trunk
                       Inferior
                       vena                                                                                                                              Left pulmonary vein
                                                                                  Left
                       cava                                                       ventricle
                                                                                                    Ventricular
                                                                                                    septal                                                  Left ventricle
                                                                                                    defect

                                           A                                                                      B

                                  Figure 12.4-4. PDA. A: Ductal dependency for pulmonary blood flow in pulmonary
                                  valvular atresia. The ductus arteriosus must be open for blood to enter the pulmonary
                                  arteries; as the ductus arteriosus closes, pulmonary blood flow is lost, and the patient
                                  becomes cyanotic. B: Dependence on the ductus arteriosus for perfusion of the
                                  distal aorta is shown in a patient with interrupted aortic arch. Left ventricular blood
                                  (oxygenated) is able to cross the VSD and enter the PA, where it mixes with right
                                  ventricular blood. The flow is then distributed to the branch PAs and across the ductus
                                  arteriosus to the descending aorta. (Reproduced with permission from Ungerleider
                                  RM, Plunkett MD, Gaynor JW: Congenital heart disease. In: Oldham KT, Colombani
                                  PM, Foglia RP, eds. Surgery of Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia:
                                  1997).

                   Variant procedure or approaches: Percutaneous coil embolization and thoracoscopic clip ligation are stan-
                   dard alternative approaches. A robotic approach.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: PDA

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                        Right lateral decubitus (in case of right-sided PDA with right aortic arch, left lateral decubitus)

                                                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                     Incision                        Small left posterolateral thoracotomy; 3rd or 4th intercostal space

                     Antibiotics                     Cefazolin 25 mg q 4 h

                     Surgical time                   30–60 min

                     Closing                         Routine closure ± left thoracostomy tube
                       considerations

                     EBL                             Minimal

                     Postop care                     24-h observation in ICU; extubation in the OR or within several h

                     Mortality                       Rare

                     Morbidity                       Hemorrhage
                                                     Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
                                                     Chylothorax

                     Pain score                      6–8

===== PAGE 1246 =====
1246   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                1 mo–adulthood

                                    Male:Female              1:2

                                    Incidence                12–15% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology                 Failure of complete ductal closure

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Closure of a PDA in the preterm infant is done at the bedside in the NICU. These patients are intubated, mechani-
                                   cally ventilated, hemodynamically unstable, and may require inotropic support. The premature infant requiring
                                   surgical closure of a PDA typically presents because indomethacin Rx has failed or is contraindicated. They often
                                   have primary pulmonary disease and multisystem organ problems. In these infants, the symptoms of large L → R
                                   shunt and pulmonary overcirculation → cardiac and respiratory failure and ventilator dependence. Ductal runoff
                                   causes ↓ diastolic blood pressure thereby compromising coronary perfusion pressure and distal organ perfusion.
                                   Older patients may be eligible for endovascular closure in the cath lab, leaving a small percentage for open surgical
                                   closure in the OR. Surgical closure may be performed with video-assisted thoracoscopy (VAT) or via thoracotomy.
                                   More recently, a hybrid approach has been applied in select patients in some centers. In older asymptomatic pa-
                                   tients, risk of bacterial endocarditis necessitates closure.

                                   Cardiovascular            Clinical presentation depends on the degree of L → R shunting which is dictated by the
                                                             size of the ductus, its location, the PVR/SVR ratio, and any additional congenital cardiac
                                                             abnormalities. An infant with a large ductus can present with CHF due to pulmonary over-
                                                             circulation as well as with tachypnea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, failure to thrive (FTT), and
                                                             hepatosplenomegaly. A continuous systolic murmur heard best at the left upper sternal
                                                             border and widened pulse pressure with bounding pulses may be present.
                                                             Tests: CXR: Normal or cardiomegaly with ↑ PA size and ↑ pulmonary vascular markings.
                                                             EKG: Normal or LVH/RVH. ECHO diagnostic: documents patency, evaluates left-sided
                                                             cardiac chamber sizes and aortic arch anatomy, and estimates size of shunt.

                                   Laboratory                Hct; others as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication             Not indicated in premature infants. Midazolam 0.5–0.7 mg/kg po 20 min prior to induc-
                                                             tion for children > 9 mo having routine PDA closure.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Anesthetic technique: Most children presenting for elective closure of PDA via thoracotomy are candidates for a
                                   thoracic epidural or, in patients < 10 kg, a caudal catheter can be threaded up to thoracic level 8–10. If a neuraxial
                                   block is contraindicated or not desired, a subcostal or paravertabrel block are reasonable alternatives for postop an-
                                   algesia. In patients undergoing thoracoscopic closure, an epidural is not required. Although in small patients, retrac-
                                   tion of the left lung may be sufficient to expose the surgical site. In patients >25 kg, placement of a DLT for selective
                                   ventilation of the right lung may be necessary to improve surgical access. In general, these patients are candidates for
                                   early extubation in the OR (see fast-track in ASD, p. 1234).

                                   Induction                 At the bedside of the preterm infant, anesthesia can be provided with ketamine (1–2 mg/
                                                             kg) and muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 1 mg/kg iv). Small doses of fentanyl (2–5 mcg/
                                                             kg) may be given for supplemental analgesia. During lateral decubitus positioning, careful
                                                             attention to the airway and close monitoring of BP is necessary. Children presenting in the
                                                             OR for elective operation tolerate an inhalation induction with sevoflurane in 50% N2O +
                                                             O2. Once the patient is anesthetized, iv access is established, followed by oral intubation,
                                                             with administration of a muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 1 mg/kg).

===== PAGE 1247 =====
Surgery for Patent Ductus Arteriosus           1247

                    Maintenance                In patients for whom immediate postop extubation is planned, anesthesia is maintained with
                                               isoflurane in air + O2 ± remifentanil (0.1–0.4 mcg/kg/min). Surgical retraction of the left lung,
                                               specifically if a VATS is performed, may require ↑ FiO2 to prevent hypoxemia. Prior to lung
                                               isolation, hyperoxia and hypocarbia should be avoided to limit degree of L → R shunting.

                    Emergence                  Older patients with an isolated PDA and no PVOD may be candidates for fast-tracking
                                               and may be extubated awake in the OR. In these cases, and if a thoracotomy has been per-
                                               formed, an effective regional anesthetic is particularly helpful for fast-tracking.

                    Epidural                   Thoracic level T8–10 preferred. For neonates < 10 kg, a caudal catheter can be advanced
                                               to thoracic levels. Correct tip location should be verified either via US/Doppler or fluoros-
                                               copy. Then, an initial bolus of bupivacaine (0.25%) or ropivacaine (0.2%) at 0.3–0.5 mL/
                                               kg with either hydromorphone (5–10 mcg/kg) ± clonidine (0.5–1 mcg/kg) is administered
                                               (Max 20 mL, in intermittent doses titrated to hemodynamic tolerance). Subsequently,
                                               bupivacaine or ropivacaine may either be infused or bolused at a rate of 0.2–0.4 mg/kg/h
                                               depending on the patient’s age.
                                               3 coagulation parameters prior to placing epidural/caudal catheter.

                    Blood and fluid            IV: 22–24 × 1–2                          Usually blood loss is minimal but may become sig-
                       requirements            Continue iv dextrose.                    nificant if the ductus is torn during ligation.
                                               Blood warmer
                                               T&C                                      Have blood available for rapid transfusion.
                                               3 for air bubbles                        Clear air bubbles from iv tubing and stopcocks (poten-
                                                                                        tial bidirectional shunt → paradoxical embolism).

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1).          Both blood pressure monitoring and pulse oximetry
                                               ± Arterial line                          should be applied to the upper extremity, preferably
                                               ± CVP line                               the right arm (preductal) as well as the lower extremity
                                                                                        (postductal) to detect inadvertent aortic ligation:
                                                                                        → ↓ LE pulses/pressure/perfusion. Inadvertent PA
                                                                                        occlusion → ↓ SpO2 + ↓ ETCO2.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                    Complications              Occlusion of aorta or PA
                                               Torn ductus → hemorrhage
                                               Residual PDA
                                               Creation of coarctation                  3 ECHO.
                                               Lung trauma ± pneumothorax

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
                                               Vagus nerve injury

                    Tests                      Hct                                      Other tests as indicated
                                               CXR

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bacha EA, Hijazi ZM: Hybrid procedures in pediatric cardiac surgery. Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular surgery.
                        Pediatr Card Surg Annu 2005: 78–85.
                     2. Boltz MG, Hammer GB, Andropoulos DB: Regional anesthesia and postoperative pain management. In: Andropoulos DB,
                        Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds. Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2010, 356–70.
                     3. Chaudhary V, Chauhan S, Choudhury M, Kiran U, Vasdev S, Talwar S: Parasternal intercostals block with ropivacaine for
                        postoperative analgesia in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a double-blind, randomized, controlled study.
                        J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2012; 26:439–42.

===== PAGE 1248 =====
1248   chap t er 12.4          Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                     4. Diaz LK: Anesthesia and postoperative analgesia in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Pediatric Drugs 2006;
                                        8:223–33.
                                     5. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russell IA, Mossad EB, eds. Anesthesia for
                                        Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008, 167–251.
                                     6. Hammer GB: Regional anesthesia for pediatric cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1999; 13:210–3.
                                     7. Janvier A, Martinez JL, Barrington K, et al: Anesthetic technique and postoperative outcome in preterm infants undergoing
                                        PDA closure. J Perinatology 2010; 30:677–82.
                                     8. Peterson KL, DeCampli WM, Pike NA, et al: A report of 220 cases of regional anesthesia in pediatric cardiac surgery. Anesth
                                        Analg 2000; 90:1014–19.
                                     9. Walker SG: Anesthesia for left-to-right shunt lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds. Anesthesia for
                                        Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell Publishing, Chichester, UK: 2010, 373–97.

                                   Surgery for Coarctation of the Aorta
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital narrowing of the upper descending aorta, typically located
                                   at the juxtaductal region (Fig. 12.4-5). Coexisting intracardiac defects are not uncommon. Surgical repair of aortic
                                   coarctation, first performed by Crafoord in 1944, consisted of resection of the narrowed aortic segment, followed
                                   by an end-to-end repair. The same year, Blalock and Park proposed an alternative technique in which the left sub-
                                   clavian artery was divided distally and sutured into the descending thoracic aorta, creating a bypass. Subsequently,
                                   the use of an onlay prosthetic graft to widen the area of coarctation and the use of a subclavian artery flap were
                                   described by Waldhausen. Prosthetic interposition tube graft repairs have been described in patients with dif-
                                   fuse aortic hypoplasia. Patients with an associated intracardiac L → R shunt (e.g., VSD) may require concomitant
                                   pulmonary artery banding following repair of the coarctation.
                                   In infants, a left posterolateral thoracotomy approach is used. The lung is retracted anteriorly, and the pleura are
                                   incised vertically over the aorta, along the left subclavian artery and the descending aorta. The aortic arch, all the
                                   arch branches, and the descending aorta are thoroughly mobilized. The PDA/ligamentum arteriosus is ligated and
                                   divided. Vascular clamps are placed across the aortic arch and the descending aorta. The aortic arch clamp also

                                                      A                           Innominate A.           B
                                                                      AAo
                                                                                       Left common
                                                                                       Carotid A.
                                                                     DA

                                                                                     Left subclavian A.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                              DAo

                                                                                 C

                                             Figure 12.4-5. Redrawn with permission from Younoszai AK, Reddy VM, Hanley FL,
                                             et al: Intermediate term follow-up of the end-to-side aortic anastomosis for coarctation
                                             of the aorta. Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74(5):1631–4.

===== PAGE 1249 =====
Surgery for Coarctation of the Aorta           1249

                   partially occludes the distal ascending aorta. The aortic isthmus is ligated. The coarctated segment and all ductal
                   tissue from the descending aorta are excised. An aortotomy is made in the aortic arch (may extend on to the distal
                   ascending aorta), and the descending aorta is anastomosed to the aortic arch. Rarely if a subclavian flap angioplasty
                   is performed, the distal left subclavian artery is ligated and opened longitudinally down into the aorta, across the co-
                   arctation, and into the descending aorta. The subclavian flap is then turned down and anastomosed to the descending
                   aorta across the coarctated segment. Patch aortoplasty is performed by creating a longitudinal aortotomy above and
                   below the coarctation and suturing a generously sized patch onto the defect. Following repair, the aortic cross-clamps
                   are released, and hemostasis is secured. A pleural drainage tube is placed, and the pleura are sutured over the aorta,
                   followed by standard closure.

                   Variant procedure or approaches: In adults and older children (teens), balloon dilatation with stent place-
                   ment is an acceptable alternative.

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Coarctation of the aorta

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Infant                                              Child or Adult

                     Position               Right lateral decubitus                             ⇐

                     Incision               Posterolateral left thoracotomy,                    ⇐
                                            3rd–4th interspace

                     Unique                 Right upper limb arterial line. Avoid iv or arte-   Collateral circulation is adequate if distal aortic
                       considerations       rial lines in left arm. Mild hypothermia and        MAP > 50 mm Hg. In rare cases of inadequate
                                            surface cooling (35°C).                             collateral circulation, left atrial-to-descending-
                                                                                                aorta or femoral bypass should be considered.
                                                                                                Mild hypothermia of 35° may be useful.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h                            ⇐

                     Surgical time          Aortic cross-clamp: 12–20 min                       Aortic cross-clamp: 10–15 min
                                            Total: 1–1.5 h                                      Total: 2–2.5 h

                     Closing                Thoracostomy tube                                   ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Minimal                                             1–2 mL/kg

                     Postop care            Early extubation in ICU; consider intercostal       ⇐
                                            nerve block or epidural analgesia; careful
                                            control of MAP may require SNP or esmolol
                                            infusion.

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                     Mortality              < 1%                                                ⇐

                     Morbidity              Chylothorax                                         ⇐
                                            Bleeding                                            ⇐
                                            Infection                                           ⇐
                                            Paraplegia: < 0.5%                                  ⇐

                     Pain score             8–10                                                8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                            Infant                                              Child or Adult

                     Age range              1 wk–1 yr                                           1 yr–adult

                     Male:Female            2:1; 1:1 for coarctations with associated           ⇐
                                            defects

===== PAGE 1250 =====
1250   c ha p t er 12.4   Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                                        Infant                                              Child or Adult

                                    Incidence           5–8% of congenital heart defects                    5% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology            Unknown. Ductal sling may be the single most        ⇐
                                                        contributory factor.

                                    Associated          PDA (50%); VSD (36%); congenital mitral stenosis   Usually an isolated defect. When repaired at a
                                      conditions        (7%); single ventricle (7%); TGA/VSD (7%)           later age, bicuspid aortic valve.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology      Coarctation is a narrowing of the aortic arch, most commonly occurring at the junction
                                                        of the ductus arteriosus (juxta-ductal) and distal to the left subclavian artery. The clinical
                                                        presentation of the neonate or infant with coarctation depends on (a) location and degree
                                                        of obstruction, (b) rate at which high-grade stenosis developed thereby affecting the degree
                                                        of collateralization to the distal aorta, (c) patency of the ductus, (d) PVR, and (e) associ-
                                                        ated cardiac anomalies. It has been hypothesized that coarctation develops in the setting
                                                        of reduced anterograde flow in the aorta, thereby providing a possible explanation why
                                                        this anatomic pathology is found in the setting of left-obstructive lesions (MS, AS, HLHS,
                                                        aortic arch hypoplasia) but virtually never along with right-obstructive lesions.
                                                        Neonates with critical stenosis will demonstrate ductal-dependent aortic flow (R → L shunt)
                                                        resulting in differential cyanosis. With the PVR initially being high and systemic RV pressure
                                                        being low, LE pulses may be palpable, obscuring the diagnosis. In these patients, closure of
                                                        the duct over the ensuing 4–10 d of life will result in near loss of distal perfusion leading to
                                                        acidemia, gut ischemia, and cold lower extremities. If there is an associated ASD/VSD, the
                                                        acute increase in LV afterload will further enhance L → R shunting and divert blood from
                                                        the distal aorta. These neonates may present in shock and require prompt resuscitation and
                                                        surgery. Patients with mild-to-moderate stenosis and no associated abnormalities will be
                                                        asymptomatic with upper extremity HTN and diminished lower extremity pulses.

                                   Respiratory          Tests: CXR (cardiomegaly, characteristic aorta, PE)

                                   Cardiovascular       Neonates: Neonates present with “critical” coarctation and are ductal-dependent. If the
                                                        ductus is closing, PGE1 administration to reopen the duct—or to at least relax juxtaductal
                                                        tissue—can be life saving. PGE1 treatment may also allow time for ECHO assessment of
                                                        associated lesions.
                                                        Infants: Present with upper extremity hypertension and murmur. Imaging studies such as
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                        MRI or CT scan may be needed to confirm diagnosis if gradient is not well detected by ECHO.
                                                        Older children: Often present with upper extremity HTN, HA, and diminished or absent
                                                        femoral pulses. The indication for operation is similar to that of infants. Systemic HTN and
                                                        LVH may not resolve following repair.
                                                        Tests: ECHO; ECG; ABG; CXR—rib notching 2° collateral vessels. (This is a late finding.)
                                                        Recently, cardiac MRI or CT angio of the chest are used to diagnose coarctation and other
                                                        associated anomalies.

                                   Renal                Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                                   CNS                  PGE1 is associated with apnea in the newborn. Generally, the neonate is intubated once the
                                                        prostaglandin infusion is started.

                                   Laboratory           Hct; T&C

                                   Premedication        Not appropriate in severely ill infants. Otherwise, for patients > 9 mo, midazolam
                                                        0.5–0.7 mg/kg po (maximum of 20 mg). For children > 25 kg, lorazepam 1–2 mg po 2 h
                                                        before surgery.

===== PAGE 1251 =====
Surgery for Coarctation of the Aorta       1251

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. For the neonate, fast-tracking is not appropriate.

                    Induction              In neonates, an iv induction with fentanyl (2–5 mcg/kg) and rocuronium (0.6–1 mg/kg)
                                           is appropriate to achieve stable hemodynamic conditions. Maintain HR, preload, and
                                           contractility to maintain cardiac output. Avoid ↓ SVR and myocardial depression, as well
                                           as ↑ SVR, as the latter may further reduce LV cardiac output. In older patients, with only
                                           proximal systemic HTN, iv induction or inhalation induction (sevoflurane and O2) is
                                           usually well tolerated. In most neonates, infants and children, single-lumen ETT is suf-
                                           ficient. In some children, selective ventilation of the right lung with a DLT will facilitate
                                           surgery.

                    Maintenance            An opioid technique (10–20 mcg/kg fentanyl ± volatile agent) is appropriate for criti-
                                           cally ill neonates. Consider mild hypothermia (34–35°C) for CNS protection. The opera-
                                           tion usually is via a left thoracotomy. The aortic arch, isthmus, and descending aorta are
                                           mobilized. 100 U/kg of heparin may be given. The ductus arteriosus is ligated, then the
                                           aortic arch and descending aorta are occluded. The anesthesiologist should observe the
                                           arterial line trace closely during proximal occlusion and immediately inform the surgeon
                                           of any damping, check BP/SaO2 in UE (right arm) and LE. If early postop extubation is
                                           planned, see fast-tracking (see p. 1234). In neonates with critical stenosis, continuation of
                                           a PGE1 infusion until CPB has been established may be necessary to avoid cardiovascular
                                           collapse.

                    Emergence              Older infants and children, without coexisting disease, undergoing elective opera-
                                           tion can usually be extubated in the OR. In young infants, SBP consistently > 120 mm
                                           Hg should be treated, and an esmolol and or SNP infusion may have to be started in
                                           the OR. In neonates or infants with compromised cardiac function, extubation should
                                           be delayed until their clinical status has improved. Dopamine or milrinone may be
                                           required. A chest tube is left in place to monitor blood loss or the appearance of a chylous
                                           effusion.

                    Blood and fluid        IV: appropriate for patient size ×     As a rule, infants and children undergoing coarc-
                       requirements          1–2                                  tation repair will not require transfusion. Infre-
                                           LR @ TKO (D5 LR in neonates)           quently, however, sudden and substantial blood loss
                                           Blood warmer                           can occur, necessitating rapid transfusion. Ade-
                                           T&C 1–2 U.                             quate iv access and immediate availability of blood
                                                                                  are essential in this operation.

                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                           RUE arterial line ± CVP                BP must be monitored above and below the level
                                                                                  of coarctation. A right radial arterial line allows BP

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                  monitoring during occlusion of the aortic arch. If a
                                                                                  percutaneous radial arterial line cannot be placed, a
                                                                                  surgical cutdown should be performed or a right axil-
                                                                                  lary arterial line should be placed.
                                           BP cuffs × 2 (UE + LE)                 Both upper and lower extremity cuff pressures
                                                                                  should be monitored.
                                           Temperature                            Monitor rectal temperature and maintain it below
                                                                                  350C.
                                           NIRS                                   Both cerebral and somatic
                                                                                  3 ABG, glucose, Hct at intervals.

                    Control of BP          Anesthetic depth                       In neonates and infants, GA is usually sufficient
                                                                                  to control BP during aortic cross-clamp; how-
                                                                                  ever, SNP may be necessary to control BP in some
                                                                                  patients. Caution should be exercised to avoid ↓ ↓
                                                                                  BP, because ↓ aortic pressure and ↑ CSF pressure
                                                                                  will impair spinal cord perfusion.

===== PAGE 1252 =====
1252   c ha p t er 12.4         Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Aortic cross-               ± Heparin 100 U/kg                           Aortic cross-clamping presents an acute afterload
                                     clamping                  Ductus arteriosus ligated                    to the LV. In preparation for release of cross-clamp,
                                                               Aorta cross-clamped × 2                      decrease or eliminate volatile anesthetic. Be pre-
                                                               3 arterial line for damping.                 pared for volume resuscitation (blood, colloid,
                                                               Ischemia time = 10–20 min                    crystalloid) and hyperventilation. NaHCO3 is fre-
                                                               Maintain distal perfusion.                   quently required (1–2 mEq/kg). 3 ABG and treat
                                                               Lactic acidosis → ↓ SVR + ↓BP.               accordingly.

                                   Complications               Spinal cord ischemia
                                                               HTN
                                                               Bleeding
                                                               Hypothermia
                                                               Residual coarctation

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Paraplegia                                   Incidence = 0.14–0.4%. The cause is likely 2° spinal
                                                               HTN                                          cord ischemia.
                                                               Bleeding
                                                               GI bleed                                     Occurs infrequently. Attributable to mesenteric
                                                               Abdominal pain and ileus                     arteritis. Neonates are at risk for GI reperfusion
                                                               Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury             injury following repair. These patients are kept npo
                                                               Phrenic nerve injury                         for 12–24 h.
                                                               Chylous effusion
                                                               Residual or recurrent coarctation

                                   Tests                       CXR
                                                               Hct
                                                               ABGs

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Boltz MG, Hammer GB, Andropoulos DB: Regional anesthesia and postoperative pain management. 2nd ed. In: Andropoulos
                                        DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds. Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2010, 356–70.
                                     2. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008,
                                        167–251.
                                     3. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EG, Doty DB, et al: Coarctation of the aorta and interrupted aortic arch. In: Kouchoukos NT,
                                        Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds. Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone,
                                        Philadelphia: 2003, 1315–76.
                                     4. Maddali MM, Valliattu J, Al Delamie T, et al: Selection of the monitoring side and outcome after neonatal coarctation repair.
                                        Asian Cardiovascular & Thoracic Annals 2010; 16:236–9.
                                     5. Spaeth JP, Loepke AW: Anesthesia for left-sided obstructive lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel LA, Mossad EB,
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        eds. Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease. Blackwell Publishing, Chichester, UK: 2010, 398–418.

                                   Surgery for Tetralogy of Fallot
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: In tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), the RV infundibulum is maldeveloped, resulting in RV outflow tract
                                   obstruction (RVOTO), a large malalignment (overriding aorta) VSD, RVH (see Fig. 12.4-6), and, occasionally, an ASD
                                   (pentalogy of Fallot). TOF is the most common cyanotic congenital cardiac defect. Pathophysiologically, RVOTO leads
                                   to significant R → L shunting across a nonrestrictive VSD, which, in turn, leads to inadequate pulmonary blood flow
                                   and varying degrees of cyanosis. The variation in presentation depends primarily on the severity and type of RVOTO.
                                   Patients with TOF were first treated palliatively beginning in 1944, with the introduction of the Blalock-Taussig
                                   (B-T) systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. This procedure augments pulmonary blood flow and, hence, systemic

===== PAGE 1253 =====
Surgery for Tetralogy of Fallot     1253

                                Figure 12.4-6. Anatomic features of tetralogy of Fallot. The primary morphologic
                                abnormality, anterior and superior displacement of the infundibular septum, results
                                in malalignment VSD, overriding the aortic valve and obstructing RV outflow. RV
                                hypertrophy is a secondary occurrence. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield
                                LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice,
                                2nd edition. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                   oxygenation. Currently, however, most cases of TOF are treated routinely with early complete correction between
                   3–12 mo of age. Neonatal repair is performed in infants who are severely cyanotic (SaO2 < 80%), have ductal-
                   dependent pulmonary blood flow, or have cyanotic spells. Initial palliation with the B-T procedure is now reserved
                   for patients with severe pulmonary arterial hypoplasia and (by some surgeons) for an anomalous left anterior de-
                   scending coronary artery originating from the right coronary artery.
                   Surgical correction is performed through a standard median sternotomy on standard CPB with moderate hypother-
                   mia. During cooling, the modified B-T shunt, if present, is ligated and divided, followed by aortic cross-clamping,
                   cardioplegic arrest, and topical cooling. The pulmonary valve and RVOT are accessed through a longitudinal pul-
                   monary arteriotomy and the tricuspid valve (via a right atriotomy), respectively. RVOTO is treated as necessary by
                   infundibular muscle resection, pulmonary valvotomy or valvectomy, and patch augmentation of the main PA or its
                   branches. Autologous pericardium, Gore-Tex, or other type of synthetic/biologic material may be used for patch
                   widening the RVOT at any level, from the RV to the PAs. The primary goal in relieving the RVOTO is to save the pul-
                   monary valve, avoid a transcannular patch, and minimize pulmonary valve insufficiency. The VSD, accessed through
                   the tricuspid valve, is closed with a patch (pericardial/Dacron) in the standard fashion with care being taken to avoid
                   injury to the bundle of His.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: In patients with severe hypoplasia or atresia of the RVOT, or in patients with

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                   an anomalous origin of the LAD coronary artery from the right coronary artery, a Rastelli procedure is performed.
                   This operation consists of patch closure of the VSD and reconstruction of the RVOT in which a conduit, in the form
                   of a cryopreserved homograft or valved prosthesis, is placed between the RV and the PA.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: TOF; cyanotic CHD; severe cyanotic spells; failure to thrive (FTT)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                              Infant and Adult Repair
                                             Neonate Repair                                                   With Standard CPB

                     Position                Supine                                                           ⇐

                     Incision                Standard median sternotomy                                       ⇐

                     Unique                  R → L shunt → systemic embolization                              ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h                                         ⇐

===== PAGE 1254 =====
1254   c ha p t er 12.4    Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                                              Infant and Adult Repair
                                                         Neonate Repair                                                       With Standard CPB

                                    Surgical time        Aortic cross-clamp: 30–60 min                                        30–50 min
                                                         CPB: 90–120 min                                                      75–100 min
                                                         Total: 3–4 h                                                         3–4 h

                                    Closing              Chest tube in pericardial (and possibly pleural) space, if opened;   ⇐
                                      considerations     temporary ventricular pacing wires; routine right- and left-atrial
                                                         lines for monitoring.

                                    EBL                  Moderate                                                             ⇐

                                    Postop care          ICU × 2–3 d. 1- to 3-d assisted ventilation; inotropes for RV        ICU for 1–2 d
                                                         dysfunction

                                    Mortality            ~2%                                                                  ⇐

                                    Morbidity            Junctional tachycardia                                               ⇐
                                                         Atrial dysrhythmias                                                  ⇐
                                                         Hemorrhage                                                           ⇐
                                                         Infection                                                            ⇐
                                                         Low CO                                                               ⇐
                                                         Stroke                                                               ⇐
                                                         Heart block                                                          ⇐
                                                         Residual VSD                                                         ⇐
                                                         Transient, right-side CHF                                            ⇐

                                    Pain score           8–10                                                                 8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range            Neonate–adult (usually < 6 mo)

                                    Male:Female          3:2

                                    Incidence            10% of congenital cardiac defects

                                    Etiology             22 g microdeletion is seen in some patients, who also may have DiGeorge syndrome; higher
                                                         than expected prevalence of older maternal age at time of conception of affected children.

                                    Associated           A-V canal; PDA; previous systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunt; anomalous left coronary artery
                                      conditions         from pulmonary artery (ALCAPA); metabolic acidosis (profound hypoxia); right-sided aortic arch
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology       TOF is the most common form of cyanotic heart disease. Its clinical presentation can vary
                                                         greatly (e.g., signs of CHF, pink-tets, profound cyanosis) reflecting its wide anatomic varia-
                                                         tions. The critical factor is the degree of RVOTO, which determines the amount of R → L
                                                         shunting across the VSD. In TOF, the RVOTO usually has fixed and dynamic components.
                                                         The latter can be related to RV infundibular spasm and variations in pH, PaCO2, and PaO2.
                                                         The onset of hypercyanotic episodes in an infant < 3 mo of age is an indication for complete
                                                         surgical repair.

                                   “TET” spells          Hypercyanotic episodes or “TET” spells: These constitute medical and surgical emergencies;
                                                         however, they are seen less frequently due to early surgical intervention. TET spells may
                                                         present in early infancy and are related to infundibular spasm resulting in ↑ R → L shunting.

===== PAGE 1255 =====
Surgery for Tetralogy of Fallot     1255

                    Table 12.4-1. Treatment for TET Spells
                    Treatment Modalities                 Effect
                    1. Knee-chest position               ↑ SVR.
                    2. Abdominal compression             Simulates squatting. ↑ SVR, ↑ preload, opens RVOT.
                    3. Volume administration             ↑ preload, opens RVOT.
                    4. O2                                Pulmonary vasodilator
                    5. Sodium bicarbonate                Correction of metabolic acidosis, normalizes SVR (1–2 meq/kg)
                    6. Analgesia and sedation            Negative inotropy → reduced RVOT spasm. Morphine sulfate 0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv
                    7. Alpha-agonist (phenylephrine)     ↑ SVR. Dose: 10 mcg/kg bolus and repeat. 2–5 mcg/kg/min (may not be effective in
                                                         cases of severe RVOT)
                    8. Beta-blockers (esmolol)           Negative inotropy. Dose: 50 mcg/kg bolus. 50–300 mcg/kg/min infusion.

                    “TET” spells                 If untreated, these episodes can progress to unconsciousness, Sz, and death. For manage-
                      (Con’d)                    ment of TET spells, see Table 12.4-1, above.

                    Respiratory                  Infectious/asthmatic pulmonary processes will complicate preop and postop cardiopulmo-
                                                 nary function. Optimize pulmonary function preop.
                                                 Tests: CXR: ↓ pulmonary vascular markings.

                    Cardiovascular               Although not typical for TOF, patients may present with CHF if left unrepaired and if there is
                                                 only minimal RVOTO. An understanding of the patient’s anatomic defects and their patho-
                                                 physiology (e.g., is their RVOTO fixed or dynamic?) is essential for formulating the anes-
                                                 thetic plan. Avoid prolonged fasting to prevent profound decreases in preload on induction.
                                                 Tests: ABG; ECG: 3 for RVH, right axis deviation (RAD) ± complete or incomplete RBBB.
                                                 CXR: 3 heart size, “coeur en sabot” (elevation of apex 2° RVH, RAE). Cardiac cath and
                                                 ECHO: Locate site of pulmonary outflow obstruction, VSD, bronchopulmonary collater-
                                                 als, PDA, abnormal patency of previous surgical shunts (e.g., B-T shunt). Define aortic arch
                                                 anatomy, abnormal coronary or subclavian arteries, tricuspid regurgitation/aortic insuf-
                                                 ficiency (TR/AI), ventricular function.

                    Hematologic                  Polycythemia (typical with chronic O2 sat < 90%) → ↑ blood viscosity → thromboem-
                                                 bolic events. Polycythemia → ↓ Plt + coagulopathy. Extreme polycythemia (> 70 HcT) may
                                                 require isovolemic hemodilution intraop.
                                                 Tests: CBC; Plt; bleeding time; coag profile

                    Laboratory                   Electrolytes if on diuretics; otherwise, tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication                Desirable to ↓ anxiety, avoid TET spells and facilitate separation from parents. Midazolam
                                                 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po 20 min before induction in a monitored setting.

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Patients with TOF, pulmonary atresia, and MAPCAS (major aortopulmonary col-
                   laterals) requiring unifocalization, present a challenge for surgical and anesthetic management. Placement of a cuffed
                   ET is necessary. OLV also may be required to facilitate surgical exposure. Bronchial bleeding 2° extensive surgical dis-
                   section requires frequent ETT suctioning. A significant portion of the procedure is done off-CPB, and hemodynamic
                   instability with ST segment changes may occur during surgical dissection. Closely monitor blood loss and replace
                   mL/mL with PRBCs. Avoid air bubbles in iv tubing/stopcocks. In older patients presenting for conduit change or
                   revisions, massive blood loss should be anticipated.

                    Induction                    Typically mask induction with sevoflurane, O2 ± air. If iv in place, ketamine (1–2 mg/kg)
                                                 and/or fentanyl (10 mcg/kg) with rocuronium (1 mg/kg) ± volatile agent. Avoid ↓ ↓ SVR.
                                                 Aggressive volume expansion (10–15 mL/kg; 5% albumin) may be necessary. Verify ETT
                                                 position (see p. D-2). Minimize mean airway pressure to avoid ↑ RV afterload.

===== PAGE 1256 =====
1256   c ha p t er 12.4   Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Maintenance          For patients not undergoing unifocalization (subset diagnosed with TET/PA/MAPCA),
                                                        anesthesia is maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane. Maintain preload, heart rate,
                                                        contractility and aggressively treat hypercyanosis. TET spells may occur due to surgical
                                                        manipulation. For example, during surgical dissection for cannulation before CPB. In that
                                                        case, the surgeon can provide direct aortic compression or urgently proceed to CPB. Refer
                                                        to Table 12.4-1 for treatment. For patients who are undergoing unifocalization, no anes-
                                                        thetic technique has so far been shown to be superior to another. We prefer TIVA with
                                                        propofol/ketamine/midazolam infusion. Antifibrinolytics, such as Amicar (bolus 75 mg/kg
                                                        after induction, followed by 75 mg/kg by perfusionist and an infusion at 75 mg/kg/h), are
                                                        routinely given to redo-patients to reduce blood loss.

                                   Emergence            Patients are transported to ICU monitored, intubated, and ventilated.

                                   Blood and fluid      IV: 22 or 24 ga as approp × 2           Blood in OR before incision. For all repeat sternot-
                                      requirements      LR @ TKO                                omy patients, have blood available for immediate
                                                        T&C PRBC                                administration. Have massive transfusion system
                                                                                                setup for older patients.

                                   Monitoring           Standard monitors
                                                        Urinary catheter
                                                        Arterial line (usually radial)
                                                        CVP line                                Double-lumen CVP placed in IJ or femoral vein.
                                                        TEE:                                    During MAPCA dissection and RVOT change with
                                                        Transthoracic LA land PA line:          beating heart close monitoring of TEE for function
                                                        have transducers available.             and air.

                                   Pre-CPB              Heparinization (4 mg/kg)                In the pre-CPB period, crystalloid and/or 5% albu-
                                                        ACT > 400 sec                           min is administered as needed to compensate for
                                                        MAP ~70 mm Hg                           bleeding and 3rd-space losses.
                                                        3 muscle relaxation.
                                                        3 pupils.
                                                        3 UO.

                                   CPB                  Ventilation stopped.                    Furosemide (0.5–1 mg/kg) for ↓ UO and hemo-
                                                        Hypothermia: ~28ºC–32ºC                 concentration.
                                                        Hct 30 typical during CPB
                                                        3 adequate flow/pressure.
                                                        3 anesthetic/NMB levels.
                                                        3 pupils.
                                                        3 face for venous congestion.
                                                        3 ABG, electrolytes, UO, Hct, and
                                                          ACT q 30 min.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Transition off       Rewarming                               Surgeons de-air heart, which can be monitored
                                      CPB               Vasoactive infusions started at 32ºC.   by TEE. A measurement of the RV and LV pres-
                                                        Flush lines.                            sure ratio helps to judge adequacy of repair of the
                                                        TEE                                     RVOTO. TEE also is used to evaluate the anatomy,
                                                        Zero transducers.                       the repair, and pressures.
                                                        Suction ETT.
                                                        Resume ventilation.
                                                        Observe lung inflation.
                                                        Supplement NMB and deepen
                                                        anesthesia.
                                                        Rewarm to 36ºC.                         Infants are at risk for development of junctional
                                                        3 bilateral breath sounds.              ectopic tachycardia (JET). Avoid excessive warming
                                                        3 ABGs, electrolytes, Hct (~40).        > 37°C. Have amiodarone available (5–10 mg/kg load)
                                                        3 ACT (> 400).                          given in 1 mg/kg aliquots, followed by 5–10 mcg/kg/
                                                        3 ECG: pacing may be necessary.         min infusion.

===== PAGE 1257 =====
Surgery for Tetralogy of Fallot         1257

                    Table 12.4-2. Blood Product Utilization8
                     Age of                         < 1 mo                                 1–12 mo                                                          >1 yr
                     Patient                        (Neonate)                              (Infant)                                                         (Child)

                     Min temp (°C)                                              < 32                         > 32                                    < 32             > 32
                     (CPB)

                     CPB time                                                                      >90                   <90
                     (min)

                     Surgery                                                           Complex               Simple

                     a-Plt, reduce vol.                   1 1 1 1                                                          –                       1                   –
                                                          					                                                                                (< 20 kg)

                     a-Plt, full vol.                     – – – –                                                         –                        1                   –
                                                          					                                                                                (> 20 kg)

                     Plt, random                          –                       –         –                   –         A                           –                A

                     Cryo                                 2                       2         2                   –         –                           –                –

                     FFP                                  A                       A         A                   A         A                           A                A

                     A = Available, but not in OR; a-Plt = Apheresis platelets; Plt = Platelets; FFP = Fresh frozen plasma; Cryo = Cryoprecipitate

                    Post-CPB                         Inotropic support (dopamine, mil-                    ↓ RV compliance is expected. RV afterload reduc-
                                                     rinone, epinephrine, and CaCl2)                      tion is essential, initially through ventilatory efforts:
                                                     Rx pulmonary HTN (↓ PVR):                            clear unobstructed ventilation; do not allow wheez-
                                                     FiO2 = 1                                             ing (albuterol pm); use gentle hyperventilation on
                                                     PaCO2 ~35                                            100% O2. Inotropic support of RV also typically is
                                                     Early use of inhaled nitric oxide                    used—dopamine/initially and epinephrine reserved
                                                     (40 ppm)                                             for severe RV dysfunction. Milrinone 0.5 mcg/kg/

                                                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                                     AV sequential pacemaker (heart                       min and CaCl210–20 mg/kg/h are routine in infants.
                                                     block not uncommon).
                                                     Transthoracic PA or LA line placed
                                                     to monitor hemodynamics.
                                                     Reverse anticoagulation.
                                                     3 ECHO to assess for residual VSDs,
                                                     residual RVOTO, B/V function.
                                                     Rx coagulopathy                                      See Table 12.4-2 for blood product utilization. MUF
                                                                                                          uses the CPB machine to remove excess H2O and
                                                                                                          inflammatory mediators (↓ edema and improved
                                                                                                          cardiopulmonary function). Transport to ICU,
                                                                                                          intubated, sedated, and ventilated.

                    Positioning                      3 and pad pressure points
                                                     3 eyes

                    Complications                    See Postoperative Complications, below.

===== PAGE 1258 =====
1258   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Persistent bleeding                        For neonatal repairs, a PFO may be left surgically open
                                                              Persistent RVOTO                           to allow RV decompression via a R → L intraatrial
                                                              Dysrhythmias (JET)                         shunt. This often will result in a ↓ systemic O2 sat. TEE
                                                              Residual VSDs                              will confirm the existence of interatrial shunting.
                                                              Heart block
                                                              RV dysfunction
                                                              Pulmonary hemorrhage
                                                              Phrenic/laryngeal nerve injury
                                                              Horner’s syndrome
                                                              Chylothorax
                                                              Shunt thrombosis

                                   Tests                      ABGs + electrolytes
                                                              Coag profile
                                                              CXR: 3 line, ETT placement.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008,
                                        167–251.
                                     2. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EG, Doty DB, et al: Ventricular septal defect with pulmonary stenosis or atresia. In: Kouchoukos
                                        NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill
                                        Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 946–1075.
                                     3. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                                     4. Schmitz ML, Ullah S: Anesthesia for right-sided obstructive lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, Muoosad EB,
                                        eds. Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease. Blackwell Publishing, Chichester, UK: 2010, 419–443.

                                   Surgery for Total Anomalous Pulmonary
                                   Venous Connection
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is a rare congenital cardiac malformation
                                   in which the entire pulmonary venous return empties either directly into the systemic venous channels via anoma-
                                   lous veins or the right atrium (Fig. 12.4-7). An interatrial R → L shunt, in the form of a PFO or an ASD, is required
                                   to maintain systemic output and, hence, survival in the postnatal period. The objective of surgical correction is to
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   redirect the entire pulmonary venous return to the left atrium.
                                   TAPVC was first successfully repaired in 1956 by Lewis and Varco at the University of Minnesota by joining the pulmonary
                                   venous sinus to the left atrium and closure of the ASD. Although mortality for this lesion was initially quite high, particu-
                                   larly in infants with obstruction of the pulmonary veins, improvements in intraop and postop management have permitted
                                   successful correction in most neonates and infants. There are four TAPVC drainage patterns as defined by Darling et al.
                                   These include supracardiac (45%), cardiac (25%), infracardiac (25%), and mixed patterns (5%) of venous drainage. The
                                   anomalous drainage in supracardiac TAPVC is usually by a left vertical vein into the innominate vein. In cardiac TAPVC,
                                   drainage is usually into the coronary sinus and occasionally into the right atrium. In infracardiac TAPVC, drainage is usu-
                                   ally into the portal vein. The mixed type consists of combinations of the other three varieties of TAPVC.
                                   When pulmonary venous drainage is obstructed, patients present with cyanosis severe pulmonary edema, pulmo-
                                   nary HTN, and ↓ CO. Symptomatic TAPVC is repaired at any age. TAPVC with obstruction is a true surgical emer-
                                   gency. Critically ill neonates with obstructed pulmonary venous return must undergo emergent correction after
                                   initial stabilization (i.e., intubation/ventilation, diuretics). Occasionally, preop ECMO may be required.
                                   In most cases, the right and left pulmonary veins drain into a common pulmonary venous sinus, allowing for its
                                   anastomosis to the left atrium for a definitive repair. Through a standard median sternotomy, the aortic and venous

===== PAGE 1259 =====
Surgery for Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection            1259

                                                                              B
                                             A

                                              C

                                                                                  D

                               Figure 12.4-7. Common forms of TAPVC: A: TAPVC to the left innominate vein
                               (L inn V) by way of a vertical vein (VV). B: TAPVC to coronary sinus (CS). The
                               pulmonary veins join to form a confluence designated as the common pulmonary
                               vein (CPV), which connects to the coronary sinus. C: TAPVC to right atrium (RA)
                               The left and right pulmonary veins (LPV and RPV) usually enter the RA separately. D:
                               TAPVC to the portal vein (PV). The PVs form a confluence, from which an anomalous
                               channel arises. (Reproduced with permission from Emmanouilides GC, Allen HD,
                               Riemenschneider TA, et al: Clinical Synopsis of Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in

                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                               Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1998.)

                   cannulae are placed and CPB with cooling is initiated. The aorta is cross-clamped, immediately followed by car-
                   dioplegic arrest. The cardiac apex is lifted up, and the pulmonary veins are identified through the posterior peri-
                   cardium. The left atrium is then opened transversely with extension onto the left atrial appendage, followed by the
                   direct anastomosis of the pulmonary venous confluence to the left atrium. Finally, via a right atriotomy, the ASD or
                   PFO is closed. The heart is de-aired, aortic cross-clamp is released, and the patient is rewarmed and separated from
                   bypass. Successful outcomes are dependent on early and immediate correction of TAPVC with obstruction, before
                   lung damage ensues. Other important factors include repair without residual obstruction and postop control of
                   pulmonary HTN.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Alternatively, repair of TAPVC may be accomplished through a right atri-
                   otomy and across the atrial septum, constructing the anastomosis between the pulmonary venous confluence and
                   left atrium from within the left atrium or through a transverse sinus approach.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: TAPVC; total anomalous venous return; total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage—all
                   of these ± obstruction and either supracardiac, cardiac, or mixed types

===== PAGE 1260 =====
1260   c ha p t er 12.4    Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position             Supine

                                    Incision             Standard median sternotomy

                                    Unique               Patients often require urgent or emergency surgery. Obligatory R → L shunting → risk of sys-
                                      considerations     temic embolization. Myocardial preservation using blood or crystalloid cardioplegia, in addition to
                                                         topical myocardial hypothermia, is used.

                                    Antibiotics          Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time        Aortic cross-clamp: 30–60 min
                                                         Circulatory arrest: occasionally, 30–45 min
                                                         Total: 2–3 h

                                    Closing              A fine polyvinyl catheter inserted through the free wall of the right ventricle and advanced into the
                                      considerations     pulmonary trunk will allow monitoring for pulmonary HTN. A chest tube is inserted into the peri-
                                                         cardial space; temporary ventricular pacing wires are placed. Left atrial lines normally needed.

                                    EBL                  Moderate

                                    Postop care          2–6 d of assisted ventilation, sedation and hyperventilation; pulmonary vasodilators, including
                                                         isoproterenol, PGE1, SNP; inotropes as needed for right heart dysfunction. Sometimes, if pulmo-
                                                         nary injury is severe or pulmonary HTN is uncontrollable, ECMO may be indicated.

                                    Mortality            2–10%, depending on presence of preop pulmonary venous obstruction and metabolic acidosis.

                                    Morbidity            Pulmonary vasospasm: 25–40%
                                                         Low CO: 10%
                                                         Hemorrhage: 2–3%

                                    Pain score           8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range            1 d–20 yr (usually < 1 mo)

                                    Male:Female          4:1 in infracardiac type; equal distribution in other types

                                    Incidence            0.5–2% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology             Failure of fusion of the pulmonary vein evagination (from posterior left atrium) with the pulmonary
                                                         venous plexus surrounding the lung buds.

                                    Associated           PDA present in nearly all infants within the first few wk of life and in about 15% of cases overall. VSD
                                      conditions         occasionally occurs (may be associated with TOF, DORV, interrupted aortic arch, and other lesions).
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology       In the most common form (supradiaphragmatic type), all the pulmonary venous return
                                                         drains into the right atrium via a vertical vein → innominate vein → SVC. When this vein
                                                         or the pulmonary confluence is stenotic or obstructed, severe pulmonary venous HTN,
                                                         cyanosis, pulmonary edema, systemic/suprasystemic RV/PA pressure, and shock ensue.
                                                         This is a true surgical emergency, requiring immediate intervention. Delivery of all pulmo-
                                                         nary venous blood to the RA results in a large L → R shunt. There is a total mixing of the
                                                         blood in the RA and an ASD or PFO are essential for survival.

                                   Respiratory           In patients with obstructed TAPVR, expect severe pulmonary edema and pulmonary venous
                                                         HTN.
                                                         Tests: 3 CXR: ↑ heart size, ↑ pulmonary vascularity, “figure-of-8,” or “snowman” cardiac
                                                         silhouette.

===== PAGE 1261 =====
Surgery for Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection             1261

                    Cardiovascular           ECHO findings: large RV and small LA. In unobstructed patients with restrictive ASD, a
                                             balloon or blade septostomy may be necessary to improve R → L shunting.
                                             Tests: 3 ECG for right axis deviation (RAD), RAE, and RVH.

                    Laboratory               ABG and Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Generally not indicated and not necessary in severely ill infants.

                    Transport of             All critically ill neonates are intubated, ventilated, and often are on PGE1 and/or dopa-
                       critically ill        mine infusions for hemodynamic stability. To facilitate transport of these patients, notify
                       newborn               the nurse in advance and request all drips transferred to OR syringe pumps. Maintain a
                                             dextrose-containing infusion during and after transport to ensure normoglycemia. Verify
                                             that the transport monitor has ECG, SaO2, and invasive pressure transducers. Resuscita-
                                             tion medications and airway equipment must accompany the patient.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Profound hypothermic CPB (16–18°C) with low flow may be required. For patients
                   who weigh < 3.0 kg, we prefer to use the ICU ventilator in the OR, as this allows for maximum flexibility in ventilator
                   support.

                    Induction                Infants are often severely ill and come to the OR intubated and ventilated, with invasive
                                             lines and inotropic support. Verify ETT placement. Patients are subject to rapid cardio-
                                             vascular decompensation. Rocuronium (1 mg/kg) is given, as is fentanyl (1–3 mcg/kg) as
                                             tolerated. Volatile agents are rarely tolerated in obstructed TAPVC.

                    Maintenance              Fentanyl (20–50 mcg/kg) in divided doses on CPB. Patients with TAPVR, especially with
                                             obstruction, have a highly reactive pulmonary vasculature. High opioid doses are useful to
                                             blunt increases in PVR due to surgical stimulation. However, for patients with TAPVR and
                                             venous obstruction, ventilatory interventions or pulmonary vasodilators to reduce PVR
                                             will worsen the pulmonary edema.

                    Emergence                Transport to ICU intubated and ventilated. If NO used in OR, must have delivery system
                                             ready for transport to ICU. There may be continued requirement for inotropic support.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 22–24 ga × 2                        Avoid air bubbles with R → L shunt—can cause sys-
                       requirements          LR @ TKO                                temic embolization of air.
                                             Continue iv dextrose in neonates.       3 blood glucose. Avoid hyperglycemia, especially
                                             5% albumin                              during profound hypothermic CPB.
                                             PRBC                                    Be careful with volume administration. Even small
                                             Blood warmer                            amounts of fluid in the setting of a small, non-

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                     compliant LA/LV can result in LV failure.
                                                                                     See Table 12.4-2 for blood product utilization.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).         Severely ill infants usually present with invasive
                                             Transthoracic LA, PA, RA lines          monitoring and ETT. 3 correct placement of UAC
                                                                                     and UVC preop.

                    Complications            Bleeding
                                             Refractory pulmonary HTN                Pulmonary HTN may be difficult to control. Venti-
                                             (see p. 1244)                           lation maneuvers (e.g., ↓ PaCO2; 100% O2), vasodi-
                                                                                     lators, and deep anesthesia to ↓ PVR. NO is started
                                                                                     for refractory pulmonary HTN; if NO (40 ppm) is
                                                                                     unsuccessful, ECMO may be instituted. In these
                                                                                     instances, sternum is not closed.
                                             Biventricular failure                   Inotropic support (dopamine, milrinone, epineph-
                                                                                     rine, calcium chloride)
                                             Overdose of NO → methHb                 3 metHb while on NO therapy.

===== PAGE 1262 =====
1262   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              See above.

                                   Tests                      ABG
                                                              Hct; electrolytes; coags
                                                              Methemoglobin
                                                              CXR                                                To assess PV → LA anastomosis and ven-
                                                              TEE                                                tricular function.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Allen HD, Clark EB, Gutgesell HP, et al, eds: Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 6th
                                        edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.
                                     2. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008,
                                        167–251.
                                     3. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EG, Doty DB, et al: Total Ventricular Septal Defect with pulmonary stenosis or atresia. In:
                                        Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition.
                                        Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 946–1075.
                                     4. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                                     5. Walker SG: Anesthesia for left-to-right shunt lesions. In: Andropoulos DB, Stayer SA, Russel L, et al, eds. Anesthesia for
                                        Congenital Heart Disease, 2nd edition. Blackwell Publishing, Chichester, UK: 2010, 373–97.

                                   Surgery for Complete Transposition of
                                   the Great Arteries
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Complete transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is a congenital cardiac defect in which the aorta
                                   arises from the RV and the PA arises from the LV (Fig. 12.4-8). TGA is associated with an intact ventricular sep-
                                   tum (TGA/IVS) or a ventricular septal defect (TGA/VSD). Pathophysiologically, this discordant ventriculoarterial
                                   configuration results in systemic and pulmonary circulations placed in a parallel (normally in series) configuration.
                                   Thus, a L → R shunt in the form of an atrial septal defect (ASD), VSD, or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is required
                                   to permit oxygenated blood to enter the “right-sided” systemic circulation. The earliest surgical treatment for TGA
                                   was described by Blalock and Hanlon in 1950 with a procedure in which an atrial septectomy was performed, im-
                                   proving the mixing of pulmonary and systemic blood at the atrial level. In the 1950s, a variety of partial physiologic
                                   corrections were developed in which the pulmonary veins or the vena cava were transposed to the alternate atria.
                                   Palliative treatment was advanced by Rashkind’s description of a balloon atrial septostomy in 1966. More com-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   plete physiologic correction was obtained by atrial switch operations, described by Senning in 1959 and Mustard
                                   in 1963, in which systemic and pulmonary venous return were baffled to the appropriate ventricles. Postop compli-
                                   cations with the atrial switch operations, however, led to the development of the more “anatomic” arterial switch
                                   operations described by Jatene, Yacoub, and others beginning in the 1970s. By 1987, the arterial switch operation in
                                   neonates was widely accepted as the standard approach to TGA.
                                   Total correction is now performed routinely in the first 2 wk of life. The heart is exposed through a standard median
                                   sternotomy, and CPB is instituted. The aortic cross-clamp is applied, followed by cardioplegic arrest and induced hy-
                                   pothermia. The ascending aorta is transected just above the sinotubular junction at and the pulmonary trunk is tran-
                                   sected just proximal to its bifurcation. Two buttons from the “neopulmonary artery” (former aortic root) containing
                                   the origins of the left and right coronary arteries are transposed and anastomosed to the “neoaorta” (former main
                                   pulmonary trunk). The distal aortic segment is swung beneath the PA bifurcation (Lecompte maneuver). Pericar-
                                   dial patches are used to repair the defects resulting from excision of the coronary artery buttons, and any associated
                                   ASDs and/or VSDs are repaired. The distal aortic segment is anastomosed to the neoaorta, and the distal bifurcated
                                   pulmonary artery segment is anastomosed to the neopulmonary artery. If hypothermia has been induced, a brief
                                   period of circulatory arrest facilitates repair of the ASD and/or VSD, if present. The aortic cross-clamp is removed, and
                                   rewarming is begun during the neopulmonary arterial anastomosis. CPB is then discontinued, and closure is routine.

===== PAGE 1263 =====
Surgery for Complete Transposition of the Great Arteries            1263

                                       A                                                          B

                                              C

                               Figure 12.4-8. TGA: A: Typical anatomy of transposition of the great vessels, with the
                               aorta anterior and slightly to the right of the pulmonary artery. The coronary arteries
                               can be seen arising from the aorta. B: Repair is best accomplished by an arterial switch
                               procedure in infancy. The great vessels are transsected, and the coronary arteries are
                               removed from the aorta and placed into the proximal pulmonary artery (neoaorta).
                               C: The distal aorta is brought behind the pulmonary artery bifurcation (Lecompte
                               maneuver), and the neoaorta anastomosis is completed. (Reproduced with permission

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                               from Ungerleider RM, Plunkett MD, Gaynor JW: Congenital heart disease. In: Oldham
                               KT, Colombani PM, Foglia RP, eds. Surgery of Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven,
                               Philadelphia: 1997.)

                   Variant procedure or approaches: In children with TGA and VSD, additional cardiac anomalies are common.
                   These include pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary atresia, straddling atrioventricular valves, hypoplasia of ventricular
                   chambers, and coarctation or interruption of aorta. Dynamic or structural subpulmonic obstruction is also more
                   common in TGA and VSD than in TGA/IVS.
                   Rastelli procedure: The VSD is baffled to the aorta with construction of a RV → PA valved conduit and is the
                   procedure of choice for patients with TGA/VSD and pulmonary atresia or significant valvular pulmonary stenosis.
                   Often the VSD may have to be enlarged to prevent LVOT obstruction. Alternatively, in some cases, an aortic root
                   translocation may be required.
                   Coronary arteries in TGA: Abnormalities in the origin and course of coronary arteries are common in TGA and, in
                   the past, influenced the success of surgery. A simple rule that accounts for virtually all variations is that the coronaries

===== PAGE 1264 =====
1264   c ha p t er 12.4      Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   arise from the sinuses of Valsalva, which face the pulmonary artery, and follow the shortest route to their ultimate
                                   destination. Only a small number pose a problem in switching the great arteries.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Complete TGA; transposition of the great vessels; transposition ± VSD; ASD; PDA

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine

                                    Incision               Standard median sternotomy

                                    Unique                 Operation to be performed before LV pressure falls substantially 2° ↓PVR.
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time          Aortic cross-clamp: 45–90 min
                                                           No circulatory arrest
                                                           Total: 3 h

                                    Closing                Routine closure with chest tube in the pericardial space; temporary ventricular pacing wire; pos-
                                      considerations       sible right or left atrial line for monitoring.

                                    EBL                    Moderate

                                    Postop care            1–5 d of assisted ventilation; pulmonary HTN protocol consisting of hyperventilation and seda-
                                                           tion and use of pulmonary vasodilators; inotropes for adequate CO.

                                    Mortality              1–3%

                                    Morbidity              Hemorrhage
                                                           Atrial dysrhythmias
                                                           ↓ CO
                                                           Coronary artery kinking and myocardial ischemia
                                                           Pulmonary HTN

                                    Pain score             8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              1–21 d; ≤ 3–6 mo in TGA/VSD

                                    Male:Female            2:1; for TGA/IVS, 3.3:1

                                    Incidence              7–8% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology               Usually no associated syndromes or other noncardiac abnormalities
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Associated             ASD; VSD; PDA; LVOTO; pulmonary atresia; coarctation of the aorta
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology          In TGA, the pulmonary and systemic circulations flow in parallel, unlike the normal series
                                                            circulation. Deoxygenated blood returns to the right heart and is pumped to the aorta and
                                                            systemic circulation without passing through the lungs for gas exchange. The oxygenated
                                                            blood returns via the pulmonary veins and recirculates through the LV back into the lungs.
                                                            Survival depends on mixing of pulmonary and systemic blood at some level (PFO, ASD,
                                                            VSD, PDA). In the absence of a septal defect, a balloon atrial septostomy (Rashkind-Miller)
                                                            may be required before surgery to promote mixing.

===== PAGE 1265 =====
Surgery for Complete Transposition of the Great Arteries        1265

                    Respiratory         Some patients are maintained preop on PGE1 (0.01–0.05 mcg/kg/min) to maintain duc-
                                        tal patency. PGE1 can cause apnea; therefore, mechanical ventilation may be required.
                                        Tests: CXR: 3 enlarged heart and pulmonary edema.

                    Cardiovascular      Number, size, and location of sites that allow for intercirculatory mixing will determine
                                        the degree of mixing (Qp/Qs) and thus O2 sats. In the absence of pulmonic stenosis,
                                        patients with nonrestrictive VSD have ↑ pulmonary blood flow (R → L shunt) and are
                                        at risk for developing CHF and PVOD. Marked cyanosis (PaO2 25–40 mm Hg) is seen
                                        in patients with TGA/IVS restrictive PFO/ASD or with PS even if a large VSD may be
                                        present.
                                        Tests: EKG: right axis deviation (RAD) and RVH. ECHO. Cardiac cath defines anatomy,
                                        coronary arteries, septal defects, PFO, PDA, bronchopulmonary collaterals, LVOT, pul-
                                        monic valve function and pressures, including PVR and LV:RV ratio. Balloon atrial septos-
                                        tomy (Rashkind-Miller) may be required to improve mixing in some patients.

                    Laboratory          Hct; coags; lactate; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication       Generally not necessary in children < 9 mo.

                    Transport of        All critically ill neonates are intubated, ventilated, and often on PGE1 and/or dopamine
                       critically ill   for hemodynamic stability. To facilitate transport of these patients, notify the nurse in
                       newborn          advance and request all drips transferred to OR syringe pumps. An air-O2 blender should
                                        be available so the inspired O2 concentration can be adjusted as needed. Verify that the
                                        transport monitor has EKG, SaO2, and invasive pressure transducers. Resuscitation medi-
                                        cations and airway equipment must accompany the patient. Patients can be transported
                                        on room air with gentle manual ventilation, taking care to avoid hyperventilation. Avoid
                                        oversedation and use of muscle relaxants before transport.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction           Neonates with TGA and intact ventricular septum are placed on PGE1 to maintain duc-
                                        tal patency and promote mixing of pulmonary and systemic blood. Anesthetic manage-
                                        ment is based on maintaining a balance between systemic and pulmonary blood flows.
                                        Avoid increase in PVR/SVR ratio because this will reduce intercirculatory mixing and will
                                        worsen cyanosis. Excessive pulmonary blood flow → ↓ systemic perfusion. IV induction
                                        with ketamine (1–2 mg/kg incrementally), fentanyl (e.g., 2–15 mcg/kg incrementally), and
                                        muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 1 mg/kg) is the technique of choice. Inotropic infusion
                                        and PRBC transfusion may be required to support BP.

                    Maintenance         For patients with inadequate intercirculatory mixing and ↓ pulmonary blood flow, treat-

                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                                        ment should include ventilation maneuvers to ↓ PVR (see TOF, Post-CPB, p. 1256) and
                                        improve mixing. Deep GA helps to blunt reactive pulmonary HTN. Avoid ↓ HR → ↓ CO in
                                        infants with limited myocardial reserve.

                    Emergence           Control aortic BP and treat any coagulopathy. Monitor LA pressures closely. 3 for myo-
                                        cardial ischemia, which can be 2° coronary air emboli or at the implantation site of the
                                        coronaries. Transport to ICU intubated and ventilated.

                    Blood and fluid     IV: 22–24 ga × 1–2                  Avoid air bubbles in patients with R → L and L → R
                       requirements     LR @ TKO                            shunts.
                                        Continue IV dextrose in neo-        See Table 12.4-2 for blood product utilization. Admin-
                                        nates. 5% albumin                   ister blood and products slowly with close monitoring
                                        Antifibrinolytics (e.g., aminoca-   of LAP. Overtransfusion can cause systemic HTN, LA
                                        proic acid)                         dilation, or pulmonary edema, producing additional
                                                                            suture line bleeding or mitral regurgitation.

===== PAGE 1266 =====
1266   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).         Severely ill infants often present with invasive moni-
                                                                                                     toring and mechanical ventilation. Correct placement
                                                                                                     of UAC and UVC should be checked preop. Also ver-
                                                                                                     ify position of ETT.
                                                             Transthoracic monitoring lines          Placed routinely on rewarming, before weaning from
                                                             (RA, LA, or PA)                         CPB. These are for monitoring and administration
                                                                                                     of inotropes and other medications. The LV can be
                                                                                                     deconditioned, may be dysfunctional, and require
                                                                                                     inotropic support (dopamine, milrinone, epinephrine,
                                                                                                     and CaCl infusion). During weaning from CPB, it is
                                                                                                     critical to monitor LAP, as a reflection of left-sided
                                                                                                     filling, simultaneously with RA pressure monitoring.
                                                             TEE                                     Abnormalities in coronary perfusion may manifest
                                                                                                     as changes in EKG rhythm and should be closely fol-
                                                                                                     lowed. TEE is useful both as a monitor of function and
                                                                                                     volume status. ECMO may be needed for severe ven-
                                                                                                     tricular dysfunction.

                                   CPB                       Management of CPB is discussed          Low flow or moderate hypothermic CPB. Cool with
                                                             in Intraoperative Considerations        pH stat management (T corrected ABG). Warm on
                                                             for TOF (p. 1254).                      reperfusion with alpha stat management.

                                   Complications             Bleeding
                                                             LV dysfunction and failure              In patients with TGA and IVS, the LV may be inad-
                                                             Myocardial ischemia                     equate to support the systemic circulation. The LV
                                                             Residual structural defects             becomes deconditioned after the PVR drops in early
                                                             Dysrhythmias                            infancy. The LV is then unable to function as the sys-
                                                             Pulmonary HTN                           temic ventricle. Inotropic support (dopamine and
                                                             Cerebral emboli (following bal-         epinephrine) and afterload reduction (e.g., SNP) may
                                                             loon septostomy)                        be necessary to separate from CPB. ECMO may be
                                                                                                     required for severe ventricular dysfunction.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications             Hypothermia                               Ischemia 2° coronary artery stenosis, stretching,
                                                             Bleeding                                  spasm, or compression. Spasm can be treated with
                                                             Dysrhythmias                              NTG and ↑ aortic pressure. If the now-anterior PA
                                                             Myocardial ischemia                       dilates (↓ PaO2, ↑ PaCO2, ↓ T, ↓ pH, excessive or
                                                             LV failure                                too little PIP, or RV failure), the coronary arteries
                                                                                                       may be compressed. Measures to ↓ PA pressure are
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                                       often essential.

                                   Tests                     ABGs; electrolytes; coag profile
                                                             CXR                                       3 line, chest tube placement; 3 for pneumothorax.
                                                             TEE

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Congenital heart disease. Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell, Malden, MA: 2008,
                                       167–251.
                                    2. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Complete transposition of the great arteries. In: Kouchoukos NT, Karp
                                       RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone,
                                       Philadelphia: 2003, 1438–508.
                                    3. Rouine-Rapp K: Anesthesia for transposition of the great vessels. In: Andropoulos D, Stayer SA, Russel L, Mossad EB, eds.
                                       Anesthesia for Congenital Heart Disease. Edited by Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, Chichester, UK: 2010, 444–55.

===== PAGE 1267 =====
Surgery for Truncus Arteriosus        1267

                   Surgery for Truncus Arteriosus
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Truncus arteriosus is a rare cardiac anomaly in which there is a common aortopulmonary trunk origi-
                   nating from the base of the heart by way of a single, semilunar valve (truncal valve). This single great artery gives rise
                   to the pulmonary, systemic, and coronary circulations. A nonrestrictive VSD is almost always found immediately
                   below the truncal valve. An anatomic classification scheme proposed by Collett and Edwards in 1949 describes four
                   types of truncus. In type I truncus (60%), a single arterial trunk gives rise to the aorta and main PA (Fig. 12.4-9A).
                   In type II truncus (20%), the right and left PAs arise separately from the posterolateral aspect of the truncus. Type
                   III truncus (10%) designates cases in which the two PAs also originate from the posterior truncus, but with widely
                   separated orifices. In type IV truncus (10%), the PA branches are absent with pulmonary blood flow derived from
                   aortopulmonary collaterals. Pathophysiologically, there is significant L → R shunting at the truncal and ventricular
                   levels, leading to unrestricted pulmonary blood flow, CHF, and pulmonary HTN. Patients become symptomatic in
                   infancy 2° CHF when the PVR ↓ and CO ↑. Untreated, 90% of infants die within 6 mo.
                   The first total repairs of this congenital anomaly were reported in the early 1960s and included the insertion of
                   nonvalved artificial conduits and aortic allograft and valve conduits. In the early and mid-1970s, repair was per-
                   formed at younger ages, with abandonment of palliative banding of the PA branches. Currently, early primary repair
                   is carried out during the first few weeks of life.
                   Through a median sternotomy, the truncus and PA branches are dissected, and cannulation for CPB is performed.
                   The PAs are snared to block pulmonary flow during perfusion. Hypothermia is induced, and the aorta is cross-
                   clamped. The PAs are separated from the main truncus, the resultant aortic defect is repaired with a patch, and a

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery

                                       A                                                      B

                               Figure 12.4-9. Truncus arteriosus. A: Cohen-Edwards (Type I). B: Surgical
                               correction involves the separation of the main PA from the truncus, VSD patch closure,
                               and insertion of a conduit between the RV and the distal main PA. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Way LW: Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment, 10th edition.
                               Lange Medical Publications, Los Altos, CA: 1973.)

===== PAGE 1268 =====
1268   c ha p t er 12.4      Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   valved homograft (12–14 mm) is prepared. An end-to-end anastomosis of the distal homograft to the PA opening is
                                   performed, the VSD is closed through a right ventriculotomy, and the proximal end of the homograft is then anas-
                                   tomosed to the right ventriculotomy (Fig. 12.4-9B). The heart is de-aired, the aorta is unclamped, rewarming and
                                   resuscitation are performed, and CPB is discontinued.
                                   There are several special considerations associated with this repair that warrant mention. The truncal valve may
                                   exhibit insufficiency, necessitating valve repair or replacement using a cryopreserved aortic or pulmonary homograft.
                                   In older infants, the PVR may be elevated, and pulmonary hypertensive crises should be anticipated. In some patients,
                                   an associated interruption of the aortic arch has to be addressed and increases the complexity of the procedure.
                                   Coronary artery abnormalities are common in patients with truncus arteriosus and may contribute to their mortality.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Truncus arteriosus (types I, II, III, IV)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine

                                    Incision                Standard median sternotomy

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 30–90 min
                                                            Total: 2.5–3 h

                                    Closing                 Routine closure with chest tube in the pericardial space; temporary ventricular pacing wire; pos-
                                      considerations        sible right or left atrial line for monitoring

                                    EBL                     Moderate

                                    Postop care             1–5 d of assisted ventilation; pulmonary HTN protocol consisting of hyperventilation and seda-
                                                            tion and use of pulmonary vasodilators. Inotropes for adequate CO.

                                    Mortality               < 3%

                                    Morbidity               Hemorrhage
                                                            Atrial dysrhythmias
                                                            Pulmonary vasospasm
                                                            Truncal valve insufficiency
                                                            ↓ CO

                                    Pain score              8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               3 wk–6 mo
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Male:Female             1:1

                                    Incidence               1.7–4.6% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology                No known etiology

                                    Associated              Coexisting interrupted aortic arch or coarctation with PDA (10–20%); right aortic arch (16%);
                                      conditions            mitral valve anomalies (10%); moderate-size or large ASD (10%); DiGeorge syndrome

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology          A single, common aortopulmonary artery—the truncus—overlies the two ventricles and
                                                            VSD. Depending on the configuration, the truncus gives rise to coronary and pulmonary
                                                            arteries and ascending aorta. Complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary circulations
                                                            occurs at the VSD and truncal valve, resulting initially in cyanosis. After birth, as PVR

===== PAGE 1269 =====
Surgery for Truncus Arteriosus       1269

                    Pathophysiology     decreases, significant L → R shunting occurs at the level of the VSD. This causes pulmo-
                      (cont’d)          nary blood flow and CHF. If present, truncal valve insufficiency causes ventricular dilata-
                                        tion and low diastolic coronary perfusion, → myocardial ischemia. If untreated, 80% die of
                                        CHF in the 1st yr. Early total correction is indicated.

                    Airway              The facial anomalies (e.g., micrognathia) in DiGeorge syndrome may make intubation
                                        difficult.

                    Respiratory         Typically, these infants present with the respiratory Sx of CHF (dyspnea, tachypnea,
                                        hypoxemia).
                                        Tests: CXR: ↑ pulmonary markings and wide mediastinum.

                    Cardiovascular      Frequently, neonates are intubated and ventilated for hemodynamic support. Arterial satu-
                                        ration > 85% indicates excessive pulmonary blood flow. This may be controlled by the use
                                        of hypoxic gas mixtures (17–19% FiO2), inspired CO2 (3–5%), and PEEP.
                                        Tests: EKG. ECHO: Usually diagnostic. Identifies the origin of the PA from the common
                                        trunk and the presence (subtype A) or absence (subtype B) of a VSD. Evaluates truncal
                                        valve competency.

                    Endocrine           In DiGeorge syndrome, thymic hypoplasia occurs with hypoparathyroidism and symptom-
                                        atic hypocalcemia.
                                        Tests: 3 Ca++ levels; parathyroid hormone

                    Premedication       Not indicated.

                    Transport to OR     See Transport of the Critically Ill Newborn (see p. 1265).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction           The goal for induction is maintenance of hemodynamic stability. If not intubated prior to
                                        induction, do not preoxygenate or hyperventilate. IV induction with ketamine (1–2 mg/kg),
                                        fentanyl (2–4 mcg/kg), and muscle relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 1 mg/kg) is preferred. After
                                        ETT is secured, avoid hyperventilation and maintain arterial saturation 75–85%. Keep DBP
                                        > 20 mm Hg to maintain coronary perfusion. Treat ↓ BP on induction with additional
                                        inotropes, transfusion of blood, or occlusion of a PA by the surgeon as soon as the chest
                                        is opened.

                    Maintenance         Fentanyl (20–50 mcg/kg). Rocuronium as needed ± midazolam 0.1–0.2 mg/kg ± volatile
                                        agent. FiO2 = 0.21. Avoid hyperventilation (↓ PVR → ↑ shunt + CHF). PEEP may be use-
                                        ful to maintain PVR. The surgeon may leave a PFO to serve as a “pop-off ” to preserve
                                        systemic perfusion when ↑ PVR and RV dysfunction occur. A transthoracic left atrial

                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                                        line is frequently placed for monitoring. In some cases, the sternum may be left open
                                        due to chest wall and mediastinal edema and the presence of the anterior RV-PA conduit
                                        (Rastelli conduit).

                    Emergence           Transport to ICU intubated and ventilated. Maintain narcotic and muscle relaxant infu-
                                        sions (e.g., fentanyl and rocuronium) for initial postop period (2–3 d) to minimize pulmo-
                                        nary hypertensive crises.

                    Blood and fluid     See Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).         Continue dextrose infusion in neonates. See Table
                       requirements                                            12.4-2, p. 1257 for blood product utilization.

                    Infusions           Inotropic support                      These patients require inotropic support (dopa-
                                                                               mine, milrinone, epinephrine, and CaCl infusion).

                    Monitoring          Standard monitors
                                        + LA, RA, PA lines                     Transthoracic lines
                                        TEE                                    TEE is helpful to assess function, truncal valve com-
                                                                               petency, RV function, and the direction of atrial shunt.

===== PAGE 1270 =====
1270   c ha p t er 12.4         Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Positioning                 See TOF (p. 1254).

                                   CPB                         See TOF (p. 1254).

                                   Complications               Pulmonary HTN
                                                               Truncal valve insufficiency
                                                               Coronary artery insufficiency
                                                               Residual lesion
                                                               Bleeding
                                                               Pulmonary hypertensive crisis                Frequent in patients > 1 mo old. Rx: NO, sedation,
                                                                                                            hyperventilation.
                                                               A-V block                                    Generally temporary, injury to conduction system
                                                                                                            unlikely because it is remote from VSD closure.
                                                                                                            Occasionally, a pacemaker may be required.
                                                               Ventricular dysfunction                      May require inotropic support.
                                                               Residual lesions                             Residual VSD, severe truncal valve incompetence
                                                                                                            or obstruction, obstruction of coronary flow,
                                                                                                            LVOTO.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Allen HD, Clark EB, Gutgesell HP, et al, eds: Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 6th edition.
                                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.
                                     2. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Truncus arteriosus. In: Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty
                                        DB, Hanley FL, eds. Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 1200–22.
                                     3. Ramamoorthy C, Tabbutt S, Kurth CD, et al: Effects of inspired hypoxic and hypercapnic gas mixtures on cerebral oxygen
                                        saturation in neonates with univentricular heart defects. Anesthesiology 2002; 96:283–8.
                                     4. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                                     5. Tabbutt S, Ramamoorthy C, Montenegro LM, et al: Impact of inspired gas mixtures on preoperative infants with hypoplastic
                                        left heart syndrome during controlled ventilation. Circulation 2001; 104(Supp I):I159–64.

                                   Surgery for Tricuspid Atresia
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: In tricuspid atresia, there is a developmental failure of the tricuspid valve, isolating the RA from
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   the RV. There are three types of tricuspid atresia, based on the relationship of the great vessels to the ventricles,
                                   otherwise known as ventriculoarterial concordance. Type I, the most common (60–80%), consists of normal
                                   ventriculoarterial concordance. Type II (15–25%) consists of d-transposition, and type III (3%) consists of l-trans-
                                   position. In most cases of tricuspid atresia, the RV is hypoplastic, an ASD is present, and pulmonary blood flow
                                   is restricted 2° pulmonary stenosis or atresia. Together, these malformations lead to R → L shunting and varying
                                   degrees of cyanosis. Those patients with unobstructed pulmonary blood flow develop pulmonary overcirculation
                                   and CHF. Consequently, the initial palliative surgical management of this defect depends on the magnitude of
                                   pulmonary blood flow; the initial procedure may be either a modified Blalock-Taussig systemic-to-PA shunt or
                                   a PA band. The subsequent definitive surgical management consists of a bidirectional Glenn shunt and a modi-
                                   fied Fontan procedure. Patients undergo these operations sequentially or, in rare cases, directly to the definitive
                                   Fontan operation.
                                   The systemic-to-PA shunt, developed by Blalock and Taussig in 1944, was the first palliative treatment for this
                                   condition. Later, other shunts were introduced by Potts (descending aorta-to-left PA) and Waterston (ascending
                                   aorta-to-right PA). In 1958, Glenn described a shunt from the SVC to the right PA applied specifically to patients
                                   with tricuspid atresia. A modification of this shunt to a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis was performed
                                   clinically by Azzollina in 1974 and has since gained widespread acceptance. In 1971, Fontan proposed a surgical

===== PAGE 1271 =====
Surgery for Tricuspid Atresia      1271

                         A                                                             B

                               Figure 12.4-10. Surgery for tricuspid atresia. A: Bidirectional Glenn shunt. Inset
                               shows classic unidirectional Glenn shunt. B: Lateral tunnel Fontan operation.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Emmanouilides GC, Allen HD, Riemenschneider
                               TA, et al: Clinical Synopsis of Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and
                               Adolescents. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1998.)

                   repair for tricuspid atresia based on separation of the right and left circulations. Subsequent modifications to Fontan
                   original operation were designed to bypass the RV and direct systemic venous return to the pulmonary circulation.
                   The most recent modifications divert vena caval blood directly to the PA—now referred to as a total cavopulmonary
                   connection (modified Fontan). In 1988, Laks suggested leaving a small ASD between the right and left circulations,
                   creating a R → L shunt for the purposes of augmenting systemic CO while still maintaining adequate oxygenation.
                   Modified Blalock-Taussig (B-T) shunt: In neonates with tricuspid atresia or other single ventricle variants with
                   low pulmonary blood flow, a modified B-T shunt is the procedure of choice. The preferred approach is through a
                   midsternotomy. The right PA and the right innominate and subclavian arteries are mobilized. The patient is heparin-
                   ized, and clamps are applied on the right PA and the innominate/subclavian arteries. Arteriotomies are performed
                   and a Gore-Tex tube graft is interposed and anastomosed to the right PA and the subclavian/innominate arteries.
                   The size of shunt (3–4 mm) is dictated by patient size and arterial anatomy. Alternatively, the procedure can be
                   performed via right thoracotomy or through a left thoracotomy if the morphology dictates a left-sided shunt. A
                   midline approach can be used for any variation of the shunt and also gives the option of using CPB in case of patient

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                   instability.
                   Pulmonary artery banding: In patients with tricuspid atresia or other variants of single ventricle and increased
                   pulmonary blood flow, PA banding is performed to protect the pulmonary vascular bed, prevent pulmonary HTN,
                   and prevent CHF. A midline sternotomy is the preferred approach. The main PA is exposed, and a 2- to 3-mm-wide
                   strip of silastic band is placed around the main PA and tightened to adjust the pulmonary blood flow. The goal is a
                   SaO2 of ~80–85%.
                   Bidirectional Glenn shunt: A standard median sternotomy approach is used. If concomitant intracardiac repairs
                   are not anticipated, the bidirectional Glenn (BDG) shunt may be performed without CPB by placing a temporary
                   shunt between the high SVC and the RA. If the patient has a preexisting Blalock-Taussig shunt on the right, it is di-
                   vided after instituting CPB. A shunt on the left side may be left open, while the bidirectional Glenn shunt is created
                   on the right. The SVC is divided, and the cardiac end is oversewn. The remaining caval end is anastomosed end-to-
                   side to the superior aspect of the right PA (Fig. 12.4-10A).
                   Fontan procedure: The heart is accessed via a standard median sternotomy. Previously placed systemic-to-PA
                   shunts are dissected and occluded prior to bypass. Bicaval cannulation and CPB with hypothermia are used. The
                   IVC is transected at its PA junction, and a Gore-Tex tube graft is interposed end-to-end between the IVC and the

===== PAGE 1272 =====
1272   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   inferior surface of the right PA. This operation, in conjunction with the previously performed bidirectional Glenn
                                   shunt, establishes a total cavopulmonary connection (Fig. 12.4-10B). After completing the anastomosis, the aortic
                                   cross-clamp is removed, the heart is rewarmed, and the patient is weaned from CPB. Fenestration of the Fontan
                                   circuit may be desirable in high-risk patients but is generally not required in patients with tricuspid atresia and good
                                   ventricular function. Our current standard is to perform the Fontan procedure without using cardiopulmonary
                                   bypass.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: A RA → RV connection can be performed in patients with tricuspid atresia
                                   without pulmonary obstruction and an adequately functioning RV. This is accomplished with a direct anastomosis
                                   or a valved/nonvalved conduit (e.g., aortic homograft, Dacron graft).
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Tricuspid atresia after B-T shunt or PA banding; univentricular heart or single ventricle
                                   after shunt or band; cyanotic congenital heart disease

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Bidirectional Glenn (BDG) Shunt                     Cavopulmonary Fontan Procedure

                                    Position                Supine                                              ⇐

                                    Incision                Standard median sternotomy                          ⇐

                                    Unique                  Particulate or gaseous emboli from iv lines         Areas of PA stenosis need to be repaired con-
                                      considerations        can become systemic emboli.                         comitantly; subaortic obstruction needs to be
                                                                                                                considered if there is a restrictive VSD and the
                                                                                                                great vessels are transposed.

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h                            ⇐

                                    Surgical time           If a simple anastomosis is constructed, the         ⇐
                                                            aorta is not cross-clamped.                         Total: 3–4 h
                                                            Total: 1.5–2 h

                                    Closing                 Chest tube in the pericardial space; temporary      Chest tube in the pericardial space; possible
                                      considerations        ventricular pacing wire; possible atrial monitor-   pleural tubes; temporary ventricular and atrial
                                                            ing line to assess ventricular filling pressure     pacing wires; possible atrial line to correlate
                                                                                                                with CVP to determine the transpulmonary
                                                                                                                gradient

                                    EBL                     Moderate                                            ⇐

                                    Postop care             Cardiac ICU; early extubation to minimize posi-     ICU or early extubation; inotropes for ventricu-
                                                            tive intrathoracic pressure                         lar function, including low-dose dopamine,
                                                                                                                milrinone for afterload reduction. Maintain
                                                                                                                sinus rhythm, A-V pacing, if required.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Mortality               < 2%                                                2–4%

                                    Morbidity               Bleeding                                            Pleural effusions
                                                            Infection                                           –
                                                            Atrial dysrhythmias                                 ⇐
                                                            ↑ SVC pressure                                      –
                                                            Upper extremity edema (SVC syndrome)                –
                                                            ↓ CO                                                ⇐
                                                            Cyanosis 2° ↓ pulmonary blood flow                  –
                                                            Pulmonary arteriovenous fistula                     Protein-losing enteropathy (late)

                                    Pain score              8–10                                                8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               4 mo–1 yr                                           2–5 yr

                                    Male:Female             1:1                                                 ⇐

===== PAGE 1273 =====
Surgery for Tricuspid Atresia      1273

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence              1–3% of congenital heart defects                 ⇐

                     Etiology               Unknown                                          ⇐

                     Associated             TGA; AV valve insufficiency requiring repair
                       conditions           or replacement; residual PA obstruction from
                                            previous procedures; dextrocardia; asplenia or
                                            polysplenia syndromes

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Pathophysiology          This is characterized by absence of the tricuspid valve and a hypoplastic RV with no com-
                                             munication between RA and RV. Survival in the neonatal period depends on presence of
                                             an interatrial communication. The degree of cyanosis reflects the size of the VSD and mag-
                                             nitude of RVOTO. Thirty percent of patients have CHF from pulmonary overcirculation
                                             2° a large VSD and unobstructed RVOT and may require PA banding. Tricuspid atresia
                                             requires staged palliation, beginning with the establishment of adequate pulmonary blood
                                             flow. Patients undergo a balloon septostomy or a systemic-pulmonary artery shunt (B-T
                                             shunt) in the newborn period to augment pulmonary blood flow. Subsequently, at 3–4 mo
                                             of age, they undergo cardiac catheterization, and a palliative bidirectional Glenn shunt
                                             (SVC → PA) is performed and the B-T shunt is ligated. The Glenn shunt reduces the vol-
                                             ume load of the systemic ventricle. Patients coming in for a BDG procedure need careful
                                             control of PVR and SVR. Any ↑ PVR 2° light anesthesia, stimulation, pain, and ventilation
                                             problems can affect the oxygen saturation by decreasing the pulmonary blood flow. These
                                             patients may also have hypoxemia due to pulmonary arterial venous AVMs. The final pal-
                                             liative procedure—the Fontan operation—is done between 1.5 and 3 yr of age, where the
                                             IVC is connected to the PA via an extracardiac conduit. At this stage, the patients may
                                             present with ventricular dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension. Early extubation and
                                             spontaneous ventilation should be planned in advance in patients undergoing either Glenn
                                             or Fontan procedures, since PPV and/or hypovolemia will decrease pulmonary blood flow
                                             and cardiac output resulting in reduced SaO2 and CO.

                    Respiratory              Identify any infectious or asthma-related problems. Optimizing pulmonary function
                                             is imperative as the pulmonary blood flow will be supplied passively from the systemic
                                             venous return.
                                             Tests: CXR; O2 sat

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                    Cardiovascular           Tests: EKG, ECHO, cath

                    Laboratory               Hct; others as indicated by H&P

                    Premedication            Midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po 20 min before induction in children > 9 mo old

                        INTRAOPERATIVE/POSTOPERATIVE
                   For intraop and postop considerations for tricuspid atresia, see Anesthetic Considerations for Surgery for HLHS (see
                   p. 1279).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Tricuspid atresia and management of single ventricle physiology. In:
                        Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition.
                        Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 1113–76.

===== PAGE 1274 =====
1274   chap t er 12.4         Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Surgery for Double-Outlet Right Ventricle
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: In double-outlet right ventricle (DORV), at least 50% of both of the great arteries arise from the RV. By
                                   necessity, there is a VSD that is usually large but may in some cases be restrictive or, rarely, multiple and muscular.
                                   The VSD may be located primarily below the aorta (DORV/subaortic VSD; Fig. 12.4-11A), below the pulmonary
                                   valve (DORV/subpulmonic VSD or Taussig-Bing DORV; Fig. 12.4-11B), below both great vessels (doubly com-
                                   mitted; Fig. 12.4-11C), or remote from both great vessels (noncommitted; Fig. 12.4-11D). In DORV/subaortic VSD,
                                   oxygenated LV blood is directed to the aorta, and deoxygenated systemic venous return from the RV is directed to
                                   the PA, resulting in minimal-to-no cyanosis. L → R shunting across the VSD, however, leads to pulmonary overcir-
                                   culation, pulmonary HTN, and CHF. In DORV/subpulmonic VSD, oxygenated LV blood is directed to the PA, and
                                   deoxygenated systemic venous return from the RV is directed to the aorta → pulmonary overcirculation and signifi-
                                   cant cyanosis. If early PA banding or primary correction is not performed in patients with pulmonary overcircula-
                                   tion, PVOD may result at an early age. In patients with some degree of pulmonary stenosis (usually infundibular),
                                   R → L shunting and cyanosis results; the natural history resembles that of patients with tetralogy of Fallot.

                                                                           A

                                                                                                B

                                                            C
                                                                                                                     D
        Pediatric Surgery

                                             Figure 12.4-11. Types of double-outlet right ventricle classified by the relationship of
                                             the VSD to the great arteries. The location of the atrioventricular node and conduction
                                             tissue is depicted. A: Subaortic VSD. B: Subpulmonary VSD. C: Doubly committed
                                             VSD. D: Noncommitted VSD. AVN = atrioventricular node; CS = coronary sinus;
                                             CT = conduction tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Kaiser LR, Kron IL, Spray
                                             TL, eds: Mastery of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1998.)

===== PAGE 1275 =====
Surgery for Double-Outlet Right Ventricle       1275

                   The first repairs of DORV were described by Kirklin in 1957. The Taussig-Bing DORV was first corrected in 1967.
                   In recent years, management has been simplified for this variant by combining the arterial switch operation with
                   an intraventricular baffle to the pulmonary valve. From a surgical standpoint, the anatomic variations and past
                   attempts at correction may lead to unique intraop challenges. For example, if a previous Blalock-Taussig shunt has
                   been performed, it needs to be controlled prior to initiating CPB. A previous pulmonary band may require removal
                   and PA reconstruction.
                   DORV/subaortic VSD generally is repaired with an intraventricular tunnel repair, in which LV blood from the VSD
                   is channeled through the RV to the aorta. Through a median sternotomy, CPB is instituted, and previous shunts are
                   ligated. The aorta is cross-clamped, and cardioplegia is administered. After performing a right atriotomy, the interior
                   of the RV is inspected through the tricuspid valve; a right ventriculotomy may be necessary for adequate exposure. A
                   tunnel constructed of pericardial or Dacron patch is then placed between the VSD and the subaortic infundibulum.
                   Augmentation of the RVOT, in the form of an outflow patch or extracardiac RV → PA conduit, is often necessary if
                   the outflow tract is obstructed or if the RVOT is encroached upon by the intraventricular tunnel. The heart is then
                   rewarmed and resuscitated, CPB is discontinued, and standard chest closure is begun.
                   DORV/subpulmonic VSD (Taussig-Bing DORV) can be corrected with an arterial switch operation and VSD closure
                   under CPB (see Surgery for Complete Transposition of the Great Arteries, p. 1264). DORV with significant pulmo-
                   nary stenosis repair resembles that for the TO. DORV with doubly committed VSD is similar to DORV/subaortic
                   VSD. DORV with uncommitted VSD poses a surgical challenge. A two-ventricle repair requires intracardiac baffles.
                   Alternatively, a single-ventricle approach is taken.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: DORV ± pulmonary stenosis; s/p PA band or modified Blalock-Taussig shunt; Taussig-
                   Bing type of DORV; CHF

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Standard median sternotomy

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                     Surgical time          Aortic cross-clamp: 30–80 min
                                            Total: 2–3.5 h

                     Closing                Routine closure with chest tube in the pericardial space; temporary ventricular pacing wire; pos-
                       considerations       sible LA line for monitoring

                     EBL                    Minimal

                     Postop care            ICU for 1–4 d of controlled ventilation; possible pulmonary HTN protocol in cases of unrestricted
                                            pulmonary blood flow (see description of management for A-V canal defect, p. 1237).

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                     Mortality              ~2%

                     Morbidity              Hemorrhage
                                            ↓ CO
                                            Atrial dysrhythmias
                                            RV dysrhythmias
                                            Intraventricular tunnel obstruction
                                            Baffle leakage; residual RVOTO
                                            Heart block

                     Pain score             8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              3–24 mo

                     Male:Female            1:1

===== PAGE 1276 =====
1276   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                    Incidence                1–3% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology                 No specific correlations or associated conditions

                                    Associated               Pulmonary stenosis; complete A-V canal defect; coarctation of the aorta; interruption of the
                                      conditions             aortic arch; straddling tricuspid valve

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE

                                   Pathophysiology            Both great vessels arise from the RV, and there is a single, large VSD, whose location may
                                                              vary (subaortic, subpulmonic). The pathophysiology varies according to the VSD location
                                                              and other concomitant cardiac anomalies, such as aortic stenosis (AS) or pulmonary ste-
                                                              nosis (PS). Those with subaortic VSD, in the absence of PS, present with minimal or no
                                                              cyanosis but may have large L → R shunt pulmonary overcirculation, CHF, and pulmonary
                                                              HTN. In infants with PS in addition to subaortic VSD, the physiology is similar to TOF
                                                              with pulmonary oligemia and R → L shunt. In DORV with subpulmonic VSD, deoxygen-
                                                              ated venous return from RV is directed to the aorta, leading to cyanosis. The oxygenated
                                                              LV output is directed through the VSD into the PA, leading to pulmonary overcirculation.
                                                              This physiology resembles TGA. The surgical approach may consist of VSD closure or TOF
                                                              or TGA repair. DORV with subpulmonary VSD and transposition is called the Taussig-
                                                              Bing anomaly.

                                   Anesthetic management: Is dictated by specific surgical repair. See sections on VSD, TOF, and TGA, for Anes-
                                   thetic Considerations (p. 1243, 1254, 1264).
                                   Suggested Reading
                                     1. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB et al: Double outlet right ventricle. In: Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH,
                                        Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003,
                                        1509–40.

                                   Surgery for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) represents a spectrum of left-sided cardiac malformations
                                   centered around a markedly hypoplastic LV and an atretic or hypoplastic aortic valve and ascending aorta; the mitral
                                   valve is also usually hypoplastic or atretic (Fig. 12.4-12). Consequently, the RV supports both the pulmonary and
                                   systemic circulations. The pulmonary venous return (PVR) enters the RA via an ASD, and the admixture of systemic
                                   and pulmonary venous return is delivered into the RV and main PA. Systemic flow is delivered into the aorta by way
                                   of a typically large PDA. Cyanosis, CHF, and systemic hypoperfusion result as PVR decreases and pulmonary blood
                                   flow increases at the expense of systemic blood flow.
                                   Until the mid-to-late 1980s, patients born with this anomaly usually died within the first 2 wk of life, with survival
                                   beyond 6 wk being very rare. A palliative surgical treatment was reported by Norwood in 1983. This treatment of
                                   HLHS comprises staged operations, with the first stage designated as the Norwood operation. The procedure is
                                   directed toward establishing effective CO from the RV to the systemic circulation and to support the pulmonary
                                   circulation with a systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunt. An adequate atrial septal communication is essential.

===== PAGE 1277 =====
Surgery for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome        1277

                               Figure 12.4-12. The anatomic features of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. The right
                               atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV), and main pulmonary artery (PA) are larger than in
                               neonates with normal circulation. LA = left atrium. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Kaiser LR, Kron IL, Spray TL, eds: Mastery of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Lippincott-
                               Raven, Philadelphia: 1998.)

                   Stage I (Norwood): A midline sternotomy approach is used. The innominate artery (alternatively, the main PA
                   or ascending aorta, if it is of adequate size) and RA appendage are cannulated, and CPB with cooling is instituted.
                   The arch vessels and proximal descending thoracic aorta are dissected. Deep hypothermia with low-flow CPB
                   technique is used. During arch reconstruction, cerebral blood flow is maintained, although many surgeons prefer

                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                   total circulatory arrest. The ductus arteriosus is then divided, and the pulmonary end is oversewn. Next, the main
                   PA is divided, and the distal PA is oversewn. An aortotomy is created, extending from the interior aspect of the
                   aortic arch through the lateral aspect of the ascending aorta to the level of the transected pulmonary trunk. The
                   entire aortic arch complex is then augmented, creating a “neoaorta” from the proximal portion of the transected
                   main PA, which is anastomosed to the ascending aorta and arch. A cryopreserved homograft patch is used to
                   facilitate the repair. The RA is opened, and the atrial septum is excised to maximize the size of the interatrial
                   communication. The heart is de-aired, and rewarming is started with full CPB. If circulatory arrest was used, the
                   cannulae are reinserted, and rewarming begins. Finally, a B-T systemic-to-PA shunt is created to provide pulmo-
                   nary blood flow. The patient is weaned from CPB, a pericardial drainage tube is placed, and the chest is closed in
                   standard fashion.
                   Currently, a modification of the Norwood procedure strongly advocated by Japanese surgeons is being adopted by
                   many surgeons worldwide, including the United States. This involves abandoning the modified B-T shunt in favor of
                   RV-PA shunt ± valve. This modification eliminates the diastolic runoff and preserves coronary blood flow. The major
                   advantage is a stable early postop course. The long-term implications of right ventriculotomy in a systemic RV are
                   not known at the present time.

===== PAGE 1278 =====
1278   c ha p t er 12.4       Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                   Stage II (bidirectional Glenn procedure): As the PVR normally falls in the weeks after the first-stage operation,
                                   excessive pulmonary blood flow from the B-T shunt may → RV volume overload and CHF. The 2nd-stage procedure
                                   for HLHS is intended to reduce the volume load on the single ventricle, while maintaining adequate pulmonary
                                   blood flow. This operation consists of a bidirectional cavopulmonary (Glenn) shunt (see Surgery for Tricuspid Atresia,
                                   p. 1252) and usually is performed in children 4–6 mo old.
                                   Stage III (Fontan procedure): The 3rd and final stages of the Norwood procedure usually are performed about
                                   6–12 mo after the 2nd stage and consist of the completion of the Fontan procedure (see Surgery for Tricuspid Atre-
                                   sia, p. 1252). It is designed to divide the systemic venous return from the pulmonary venous return by establishing
                                   continuity from the IVC to the confluence of the PA and SVC.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: HLHS; mitral and aortic atresia

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine

                                    Incision                Standard median sternotomy

                                    Unique                  Hypothermia (< 18°C) ± circulatory arrest; manipulation of PVR and SVR, both preop and postop, is
                                      considerations        extremely important, with the FiO2 and ventilation being crucial in regulating pulmonary blood flow.
                                                            For very high pulmonary blood flows and O2 sats > 85%, consider the addition of N2 to lower the
                                                            FiO2 to < 20%; use of afterload reduction to manipulate SVR and ↓ ventricular work.

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 4 h

                                    Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 30–60 min
                                                            Circulatory arrest (if used): 30–45 min
                                                            Total: 2.5–3.5 h

                                    Closing                 Sternum often left open, with chest tube in the pericardial space, with closure delayed until POD
                                      considerations        2–4; temporary ventricular pacing wire; possible left atrial line for monitoring

                                    EBL                     Minimal-to-moderate

                                    Postop care             2–7 h of controlled ventilation; moderate need for inotropic drugs; balancing PVR and SVR to
                                                            optimize pulmonary blood flow and systemic CO.

                                    Mortality               10–20%

                                    Morbidity               Hemorrhage
                                                            Infection
                                                            ↓ CO
                                                            RV dysfunction
                                                            Inadequate/excessive pulmonary blood flow
                                                            Tricuspid regurgitation
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Pain score              8–10

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               5–30 d

                                    Male:Female             2:1

                                    Incidence               3–5% of congenital heart defects

                                    Etiology                Often associated with genetic disorders, but no single associated defect

                                    Associated              CNS defects (29%); microencephaly (25–27%); VSD (5%); TGA
                                      conditions

===== PAGE 1279 =====
Surgery for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome           1279

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Pathophysiology     HLHS is characterized by a hypoplastic or atretic aortic and mitral valves associated with
                                        hypoplasia of the LV, ascending aorta, and aortic arch. Pulmonary venous return enters the
                                        LA and then passes into the RA via an ASD or the PFO. Rarely, pulmonary venous return
                                        is via TAPVC to the RA. The systemic circulation is supplied entirely through the ductus
                                        arteriosus. Perfusion of the ascending aorta, coronary arteries, and transverse arch is retro-
                                        grade via the ductus. Maintenance of adequate systemic perfusion relies on ductal patency
                                        and is achieved with continuous administration of PGE1. Maintaining ↑ PVR by ↓ FiO2 to
                                        0.17–0.20 (less common now), or by adding CO2 to breathing gas mixture, may be neces-
                                        sary. As the ductus closes, the systemic perfusion is compromised, → ischemia, acidosis,
                                        and eventually death. Survival is dependent on maintaining ductal patency and adequacy of
                                        mixing at the atrial level and a balance between PVR and SVR to ensure adequate pulmo-
                                        nary and systemic perfusion.

                    Cardiovascular      Tests: EKG; RAE/RVH; ECHO: assessment of tricuspid or common AV valve regurgita-
                                        tion. Severe TR is a contraindication for 1st-stage repair.

                    Neurological        Preop head ultrasound to r/o intracranial pathology (e.g., hemorrhage). Periop neurologi-
                                        cal monitoring, including cerebral oximeter is recommended (e.g., both hemispheres and
                                        flank to assess somatic oxygenation)

                    Laboratory          BUN; Cr; Hb/Hct; Plt count

                    Premedication       Not indicated.

                    Transport to OR     See Transport of the Critically Ill Newborn (p. 1265).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                    Induction           On arrival in the OR, monitors are applied and ventilation should be adjusted to maintain
                                        arterial O2 sat = 75–85%. Avoid hyperventilation (→ ↑ pulmonary blood flow). Arterial sat
                                        > 85% will cause systemic hypoperfusion. See Truncus Arteriosus, p. 1268.

                    Maintenance         Fentanyl (20–40 mcg/kg) with muscle relaxant (rocuronium 1 mg/kg) in divided doses on
                                        CPB. Volatile anesthetics on CPB. Midazolam (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) as tolerated.

                    Emergence           Transport to ICU intubated, ventilated, and monitored.

                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                    Blood and fluid     See Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)           Blood loss can be due largely to dilutional coagu-
                       requirements     (p. 1256).                              lopathy and multiple suture lines.

                    Infusions           See Truncus Arteriosus. (p. 1269).

                    Monitoring          See Truncus Arteriosus (p. 1269).

                    CPB                 See TGA (p. 1266).

                    Transition off      See TOF (p. 1256).                      After Stage I (Norwood) surgical repair, the blood
                       CPB and                                                  flow continues to be supplied in a parallel fashion
                       Post-CPB                                                 from the single ventricle. At Stanford, a small homo-
                                                                                graft conduit is placed from the RV to PA (Kishimoto/
                                                                                Sano modification) instead of the traditional modified
                                                                                B-T shunt. This prevents the diastolic runoff of the
                                                                                B-T shunt and improves coronary perfusion. Optimal
                                                                                PaO2 30–50 mm Hg with MAP 40–50 mm Hg.

===== PAGE 1280 =====
1280   c ha p t er 12.4        Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Bleeding
                                                              Pulmonary overcirculation
                                                              Myocardial dysfunction and failure
                                                              Aortic arch obstruction
                                                              Pulmonary HTN
                                                              CNS injury

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. Allen HD, Clark EB, Gutgesell HP, et al, eds: Moss and Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 6th edition.
                                       Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.
                                    2. Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Aortic atresia and other forms of hypoplastic left heart physiology. In:
                                       Kouchoukos NT, Karp RB, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, Hanley FL, eds. Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition.
                                       Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia: 2003, 1377–1400.
                                    3. Maddali MM, Valliatu J, Delamie T, et al: Selection of the monitoring side and outcome after neonatal coarctation repair.
                                       Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Annu 2010; 16:236–39.
                                    4. Ramamoorthy C, Tabbutt S, Kurth CD, et al: Effects of inspired hypoxic and hypercapnic gas mixtures on cerebral oxygen
                                       saturation in neonates with univentricular heart defects. Anesthesiology 2002; 96:283–8.
                                    5. Reitz BA, Yuh DD, eds: Congenital Cardiac Surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2002.
                                    6. Sano S, Ishino K, Kado H, et al: Outcome of right ventricle to pulmonary artery shunt in first stage palliation of hypoplastic
                                       left heart syndrome–a multi-institutional study. Ann Thorac Surg 2004; 78(6):1951–7.
                                    7. Tabbutt S, Ramamoorthy C, Montenegro LM, et al: Impact of inspired gas mixtures on preoperative infants with hypoplastic
                                       left heart syndrome during controlled ventilation. Circulation 2001; 104(Supp I):I159–64.
        Pediatric Surgery

===== PAGE 1281 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.5 Pediatric
                                           General Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           James Wall, MD, MSE
                                           Craig Albanese, MD, MBA

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Rebecca E. Claure, MD
                                           Brenda Golianu, MD
                                           Gregory B. Hammer, MD

===== PAGE 1282 =====
Resection of Cystic Hygroma, Branchial
                                   Cleft Cyst, Thyroglossal Duct Cyst, or Other
                                   Cervical Mass
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Common lesions requiring dissection in the neck and floor of the mouth include branchial cleft rem-
                                   nants; thyroglossal duct remnants; vascular malformations (hemangiomas); lymphatic malformations (cystic hygro-
                                   mas); and infected or enlarged lymph nodes refractory to antibiotic therapy.
                                   Surgical approach: Ideally, an acutely inflamed node (typically Staphylococcus aureus) usually is incised and
                                   drained; a chronically infected node (e.g., cat-scratch disease, atypical TB) or an enlarged node (lymphoma) is
                                   excised. Remnants of the first and second (rarely third) branchial clefts are lateral masses found and excised from
                                   (respectively), the parotid region anterior to the ear, sometimes extending to the external auditory canal, or the
                                   anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, sometimes extending through the carotid bifurcation to the
                                   tonsillar fossa. Thyroglossal duct remnants are midline lesions that involve the central portion of the hyoid bone
                                   and may extend up to the base of the tongue. When acutely infected and resistant to a course of antibiotics, they
                                   can be drained; when quiescent, thyroglossal duct remnants are excised. Occasionally, it is advantageous for the
                                   anesthesiologist to digitally depress the tongue near the foramen cecum to help the surgeon know when the dissec-
                                   tion approaches this structure. Vascular and lymphatic malformations may overlap; they tend to be lateral and are
                                   sometimes extensive. Significant blood loss may result, and resection may involve tedious dissection of neurovas-
                                   cular structures, including the carotid sheath, brachial plexus, sympathetic chain, phrenic nerve, and cranial nerves
                                   V, VII, X, XI, and XII.
                                   Transaxillary subcutaneous endoscopic surgery allows an alternate approach to resecting selected lesions. This
                                   approach involves using tiny incisions placed in the ipsilateral axilla through which endoscopic ports are placed
                                   and tunneling under the skin to the neck, aided by carbon dioxide insufflation, to resect benign lesions using lapa-
                                   roscopic tools. This approach is not widely practiced; however, it appears to be safe and effective for a wide variety
                                   of lesions, including thyroid and parathyroid lesions. It completely avoids a neck incision, which can be cosmetically
                                   unappealing.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cystic hygroma; branchial cleft cyst/fistula; thyroglossal duct cyst; atypical mycobacterial
                                   adenitis

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                         Midline Lesions
                                                            Lateral Lesions (Branchial Cleft Remnant Lymph               (Thyroglossal Duct
                                                            Node, Vascular + Lymphatic Malformations)                    Remnants)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Position                Neck extended, turned to contralateral side                  Neck extended

                                    Incision                Oblique                                                      Transverse

                                    Special                 Facial nerve monitor; nerve stimulator                       None
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Nerve testing                                                None
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                                        ⇐

                                    Surgical time           1–6 h                                                        1h

                                    EBL                     5–20 mL/kg                                                   < 5 mL/kg

                                    Postop care             PICU; airway monitoring                                      None

                                    Mortality               < 2%                                                         < 1%

                            1282

===== PAGE 1283 =====
Resection of Cystic Hygroma, Branchial Cleft Cyst, Thyroglossal Duct Cyst, or Other Cervical Mass            1283

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                          Midline Lesions
                                             Lateral Lesions (Branchial Cleft Remnant Lymph               (Thyroglossal Duct
                                             Node, Vascular + Lymphatic Malformations)                    Remnants)

                     Morbidity               Airway compromise                                            ⇐
                                             Fluid accumulation                                           ⇐
                                             Infection                                                    ⇐

                     Pain score              3–4                                                          3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–school age

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Developmental anomaly; mycobacteria

                     Associated              Hygroma-mediastinal airway involvement; branchial cleft
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   These patients generally are otherwise healthy children. Cervical masses, including cystic hygroma (cystic lymphan-
                   gioma), may cause airway obstruction and difficult intubation (also see Exit Procedures, p. 1346).

                    Respiratory               The size and extent of the cervical mass should be defined carefully in an effort to detect
                                              the potential for airway compromise. Inspiratory stridor suggests supraglottic obstruction,
                                              whereas expiratory stridor is associated with subglottic/intrathoracic obstruction. If these
                                              patients have had prior CT/MRI imaging, these records, including prior anesthesia records,
                                              should be reviewed.
                                              Tests: CXR ± CT/MRI scans

                    Cardiovascular            Cervical masses may be adherent to and/or cause compression of the great vessels.
                                              Tests: CT/MRI scans

                    Hematologic               Tests: For cystic hygroma, or if a cervical mass involves great vessels or extends into the

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                              mediastinum, T&C and HcT.

                    Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             If patient > 7–9 mo and asymptomatic, consider midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) 30 min.
                                              prior to arrival in OR. Use premedication cautiously in patients with potential airway
                                              compromise.

                        INTRAOPERATivE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA with pediatric circuit; OR temperature 75–80°; forced-air warmer on OR table;
                   maintain SpO2 between 92–94% to minimize retinopathy in premature infants at risk.

                    Induction                 Standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1) in patients without airway compromise. IV access
                                              should be secured before induction when airway compromise is present or suspected.
                                              Mask induction with sevoflurane in 100% O2. As plane of anesthesia deepens, gently assist

===== PAGE 1284 =====
1284   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Induction                   ventilation. (Keep PIP < 20 cmH2O). Prior to laryngoscopy, consider atropine (0.02 mg/
                                      (cont’d)                 kg, minimum dose 0.1 mg), if < 1 month, to prevent vagal response. If difficult airway is
                                                               anticipated, proceed with difficult airway algorithm. If partial airway obstruction exists,
                                                               maintain spontaneous ventilation and perform laryngoscopy under deep anesthesia (e.g.,
                                                               ~2 MAC of volatile agent). FOB should be available. Have full range of ETT sizes available
                                                               because airway narrowing may be present. Once airway is secured, proceed with NMB
                                                               (e.g., rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg iv, or vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg iv), unless monitoring facial nerve
                                                               function.

                                   Maintenance                 Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3). Surgeon may infiltrate incision with local
                                                               anesthetic. Limit bupivacaine to 2.5 mg/kg (maximum: 10 mL of 0.25 % bupivacaine).

                                   Emergence                   Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg) and glycopyrrolate
                                                               (0.01 mg/kg). Confirm air leak around ETT and extubate when fully awake.

                                   Blood and fluid             Minimal blood loss usually                 Minimal 3rd-space losses. Each mL blood loss can
                                      requirements             IV: 20–22 ga × 1; 2nd iv if great ves-     be replaced with 3 mL NS/LR, or 1 mL albumin 5%.
                                                               sel involvement                            If great vessels are involved, place at least one iv in
                                                               NS/LR @ maintenance (see D-3).             lower extremity. Blood loss can be quite sudden;
                                                                                                          have blood available in OR.

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1)
                                                               ± Arterial line, 22 ga                     An arterial line is used when there is risk of large
                                                                                                          blood loss or to assist management of ventilation

                                   Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                               3 eyes

                                   Complications               ETT dislodged/loss of airway               ETT must be carefully secured. Liberal use of ben-
                                                               Laryngospasm                               zoin. Avoid tension on ETT by circuit hoses. Hold
                                                               Bronchospasm                               ETT during surgeon’s intraoral examination.
                                                               Hemorrhage

                                        POSTOPERATivE

                                   Complications               Subglottic edema                           Dexamethasone (0.5–1 mg/kg) and nebulized race-
                                                               Upper-airway obstruction from              mic epinephrine (2.25%) with mist O2.
                                                               edema related to tumor resection
                                                               Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

                                   Pain                        Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg q 1–2 h)
                                     management                Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg q 1–2°)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                               Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv q6°; 20 mg/kg PR q6°, one-time dose 30–40 mg/kg PR)

                                   Tests                       As indicated.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Esmaeli MR, Razavi SS, Havofteh MR, et al: Cystic hygroma: anesthetic considerations and review. J Res Med Sci 2009;
                                        14(3):191–5.
                                     2. Foley DS, Fallat ME: Thyroglossal duct and other congenital midline cervical anomalies. Semin Pediatr Surg 2006; 15(2):70–5.
                                     3. Gross, E, Sichel JY: Congenital neck lesions. Surg Clin North Am 2006; 86(2):383–92.

===== PAGE 1285 =====
Esophagus-Foreign Body Removal and Dilation        1285

                   Esophagus-Foreign Body Removal and Dilation
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Flexible, diagnostic esophagogastroduodenoscopy—a common procedure in pediatrics—usually is
                   performed under GA or heavy sedation in an endoscopy suite or special procedure area. Rigid esophagoscopy
                   usually is performed for therapeutic indications such as removal of a foreign body (FB), dilation of an esophageal
                   stricture, or injection of varices. The procedure is similar for each diagnosis and generally is performed with ET
                   intubation. FB removal is normally a very short procedure, whereas dilation and variceal injection can be prolonged
                   and may require multiple insertions/removals of the endoscope. Compression of the trachea distal to the ETT by the
                   rigid esophagoscope may occur. Radial balloon dilation, which involves less shear stress than repeatedly passing a
                   bougie catheter, is becoming a popular method of dilation. This is done under endoscopic and fluoroscopic guidance
                   and is accompanied by a very low rate of complications.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Esophageal FB; stricture; esophageal varices

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, head to the side for rigid esophagoscopy

                     Special                Rigid esophagoscopes; forceps; dilators
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Esophagoscope may obstruct airway; dilation may perforate esophagus.
                       considerations

                     Surgical time          5 min–2 h

                     Closing                Abrupt ending
                       considerations

                     EBL                    < 5 mL/kg

                     Postop care            Airway support

                     Mortality              < 5%

                     Morbidity              Esophageal perforation: 2–5%

                     Pain score             2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                     Age range              Newborn–school age

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              1/1000

                     Etiology               Varices–portal HTN; FB–possible stricture

                     Associated             Esophageal atresia–stricture; portal HTN–varices
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   Esophagoscopy for FB removal is usually performed in healthy infants and toddlers, although it can occur in any
                   age group. All of these patients should be treated with full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5). Esophageal dilation is
                   usually performed in three distinct patient populations: (a) those with prior tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair;

===== PAGE 1286 =====
1286   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   (b) those with prior ingestion of a caustic substance; and (c) those with skin and connective tissue diseases
                                   (e.g., epidermolysis bullosa [EB]).

                                   Respiratory             Patients with TEF may have residual BPD, chronic lung disease, or subglottic stenosis.
                                                           Check anesthesia records for ETT size used. Those with prior caustic ingestion and pul-
                                                           monary aspiration may have resultant chemical pneumonitis and/or fibrosis. Patients with
                                                           EB may have limited mouth opening and may have a difficult airway or require special care
                                                           regarding placing and securing of ETT.
                                                           Tests: CXR, if clinically indicated

                                   Cardiovascular          There may be persistent congenital cardiac anomalies in the TEF patient.
                                                           Tests: EKG, ECHO as indicated. Cardiology consultation, as needed.

                                   Laboratory              No routine lab analyses are required.

                                   Premedication           For esophageal dilation, patient preference is extremely important because some patients
                                                           have undergone this procedure several times. For FB removal, iv access is usually recom-
                                                           mended before induction, though a mask induction may be selected by the anesthesiologist
                                                           as well.

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, using a pediatric circuit. Room temperature should be maintained at 75–80°F.
                                   Forced-air warmer may be used.

                                   Induction               If the patient is presenting for dilation alone and has no evidence to suggest reflux or
                                                           retained food in the esophagus, a standard inhalation or iv induction may be performed.
                                                           Rapid-sequence induction is usually appropriate for FB removal. Atropine (0.02 mg/kg if
                                                           < 1 mo, minimum 0.1 mg) may be administered to attenuate bradycardia from intubation.
                                                           Preoxygenate for 2–3 min. Apply cricoid pressure. Propofol (2–3 mg/kg) followed by suc-
                                                           cinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg). Rocuronium (1 mg/kg) may be used if longer procedure antici-
                                                           pated. Intubate trachea with age-appropriate ETT. If succinylcholine was used, consider
                                                           additional neuromuscular blockade.

                                   Maintenance             Maintain anesthesia with volatile agent/N2O/O2 or propofol (100–250 mcg/kg/min) +
                                                           remifentanil (0.05–0.2 mcg/kg/min). Supplement inhalation anesthetic with small doses
                                                           of fentanyl (e.g., 1–2 mcg/kg), hydromorphone (0.005-0.01 mg/kg), or morphine (0.05–0.1
                                                           mcg/kg). Maintain neuromuscular blockade or deep plane of anesthesia. Movement must
                                                           be avoided with rigid esophagoscopy.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Emergence               Extubate when fully awake. Neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg) and glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg) to
                                                           reverse neuromuscular blockade. Do not attempt reversal of neuromuscular blockade until
                                                           first twitch of train-of-four has returned.

                                   Blood and fluid         IV: 20–22 ga × 1
                                      requirements         NS/LR @ maintenance (See p. D-3)

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. D-1)
                                                           Peripheral nerve stimulator

                                   Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                           3 eyes

                                   Complications           Esophageal perforation                  Esophageal perforation, more common with rigid
                                                           Aspiration                              esophagoscopy, may lead to pneumothorax (R > L).
                                                           Accidental extubation
                                                           Stridor 2° subglottic edema

===== PAGE 1287 =====
Repair of Tracheoesophageal Fistula and Esophageal Atresia                  1287

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Residual neuromuscular blockade
                                               Pneumothorax, esophageal perforation

                    Pain                       Minimal postop pain                        If patient reports marked substernal discomfort,
                      management                                                          suspect esophageal perforation.

                    Tests                      None

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Gercek A, Ay B, Dogan V, et al: Esophageal balloon dilation in children: prospective analysis of hemodynamic changes and
                        complications during general anesthesia. J Clin Anesth 2007; 19:286–89.
                     2. Lan LC, Wong KK, Lin SC, et al: Endoscopic balloon dilatation of esophageal strictures in infants and children: 17 years’
                        experience and a literature review. J Pediatr Surg 2003; 38(12):1712–5.
                     3. Landsmen IS, Werkhaven JA, Motoyama EK: Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic surgery. In: Davis PT, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Publishing, Philadelphia: 2011, 819–20.
                     4. Li ZS, Sun ZX, Zou DW, et al: Endoscopic management of foreign bodies in the upper-GI tract: experience with 1088 cases
                        in China. Gastrointest Endosc 2006; 64(4):485–92.
                     5. Parray T, Siddiqui SM, Hughes M, et al: Tension pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema during retrieval of an ingested
                        lithium button battery. J Anesth 2010; 24:469–71.

                   Repair of Tracheoesophageal Fistula and
                   Esophageal Atresia
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The majority of infants with tracheoesophageal fistulae (TEF) have an associated esophageal atre-
                   sia (EA), as shown in Fig. 12.5-1 (Type C). The Dx is made presumptively when an NG tube cannot be advanced
                   past 8–13 cm and gas is present in the stomach. The complications of aspiration (gastric contents come up the
                   fistula into the trachea) and GI distention compromising respiration (from passage of air down the fistula into
                   the intestines) are diminished by repair within a few days of birth. Primary repair without gastrostomy is routine.
                   The absence of stomach and bowel gas suggests a pure EA without fistula (Type A). A staged procedure—initial
                   gastrostomy with deferred EA repair—may be used in babies < 1 kg, those with pure EA, or with more critical
                   associated anomalies.
                   Surgical approach: All cases with TEF should begin with rigid bronchoscopy while the patient is spontaneously

                                                                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery
                   breathing. Bronchoscopy allows identification of the level of the TEF, detection of a second fistula, and rules out a
                   tracheosophageal cleft that would be managed differently. The operation is performed in left-lateral decubitus posi-
                   tion through a 4th interspace right thoracotomy. Preop ECHO is advised to look for cardiac anomalies and confirm a
                   normal left-sided aortic arch. In the case of a right-sided arch (10%), most surgeons approach the fistula through a left
                   thoracotomy. Debate continues on whether the best approach is retropleural or transpleural. The former is slower,
                   but it may diminish the chances of empyema if the esophageal anastomosis leaks.
                   Another approach is thoracoscopy. There is now extensive experience with this approach, and it is proven to be a safe
                   and effective method of repair in children, even those with complex congenital heart disease. It is performed using
                   three or four trocars in the modified (prone) left-lateral decubitus position, causing the lung to drop forward as 5 mm
                   Hg capnothorax is achieved. Dividing the azygous vein is necessary to find the subjacent fistula, branching off the
                   posterior aspect of the trachea (Type C). The right bronchus, aorta, and (rarely) left bronchus may be mistaken for
                   this structure. Division of the fistula may dramatically improve ventilation; until this moment, it is sometimes neces-
                   sary to operate in short 3- to 5-min bursts, relaxing lung and mediastinal retraction for 1–2 min when saturations
                   descend to critical levels. Afterward, the proximal fistula is located (when the anesthesiologist pushes downward on
                   the indwelling [Replogle] tube), and then is dissected upward into the root of the neck to achieve sufficient length for
                   anastomosis. After the posterior wall of the anastomosis is complete, some surgeons will ask for the NG tube to be

===== PAGE 1288 =====
1288   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                                 A                                            C                                               E

                                                                       B                                           D

                                               Figure 12.5-1. Types of esophageal atresia: A: pure esophageal atresia; B: proximal
                                               fistula; C: esophageal atresia, distal fistula; D: proximal and distal fistula; E: pure
                                               tracheoesophageal fistula. (Redrawn from Ravitch MM, et al, eds: Pediatric Surgery,
                                               Vol 1, 3rd edition. Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago: 1979.)

                                   replaced by a small (5 or 6 Fr) feeding tube, which is advanced into the stomach, separating the anterior from poste-
                                   rior esophageal wall during closure and permitting enteric feeds during the customary 1 wk before an esophagram
                                   is performed. This tube must be fixed in place because it has a tendency to become dislodged. Because neck hyper-
                                   extension, as would occur during direct laryngoscopy, places significant tension on the anastomosis, postoperative
                                   reintubation is to be avoided. When the length of native esophagus is too short, even after lengthening maneuvers,
                                   both ends can be tied to the prevertebral fascia or attached to monofilament sutures and brought tangentially out
                                   of the back skin (Foker). In the former case, one reoperates months later, after differential growth of the esophagus
                                   elongates it relative to the vertebral bodies—or if not, to replace it with stomach or bowel. In the latter case, stretch-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   ing daily over 1–2 wk may provide sufficient length for secondary anastomosis. A chest tube usually is left in place.
                                   Variant procedures or approaches: Pure EA without fistula (Type A) indicates a long gap—the initial opera-
                                   tion is a feeding G-tube along the lesser gastric curve, followed by definitive operation months later or the Foker
                                   procedure. A pure fistula without EA (Type E) is usually diagnosed later in life and occurs in the neck; it is repaired
                                   through a cervical incision.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: EA; TEF

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Primary Repair                                     Gastrostomy

                                    Position                 Lateral                                            Supine

                                    Incision                 Posterolateral thoracotomy (side opposite aortic   LUQ
                                                             arch)

===== PAGE 1289 =====
Repair of Tracheoesophageal Fistula and Esophageal Atresia                 1289

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Primary Repair                                         Gastrostomy

                     Special                 NG tube in upper pouch                                 G-tube
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Loss of ventilation via fistula; lung compression      May be done under local anesthesia
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5         ⇐
                                             mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time           2–4 h                                                  1h

                     Closing                 Extubation favored                                     Local anesthetic; wound infiltration
                       considerations

                     EBL                     10 mL/kg                                               5 mL/kg

                     Postop care             NICU; humidified mist; avoid CPAP and neck             ⇐
                                             hyperextension

                     Mortality               1–20%, depending on associated anomalies               5%

                     Morbidity               Stricture: 20–40%                                      –
                                             Leak: 10–20%                                           –
                                             Aspiration                                             ⇐
                                             Atelectasis                                            –
                                             Stridor                                                –

                     Pain score              7–8                                                    3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Days–weeks

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               1 in 4000 births

                     Etiology                Unknown

                     Associated              Vertebral, anal, TEF, renal (or radial) anomalies (VATER association); vertebral, anal, cardiac, TEF,
                       conditions            renal, limb anomalies (VACTERL association); trisomy 13, 18; hydrocephalus

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   EA and TEF usually are detected in the first day of life, although TEF without atresia may be difficult to diagnose until
                   the patient experiences recurrent pneumonia, cyanosis associated with feeding, or abdominal distention. The fistula
                   is usually at the distal trachea near the carina. Because of the risk of pulmonary aspiration, initial gastrostomy may
                   be performed in babies < 1 kg. Associated conditions frequently associated with TEF include prematurity (30–40%)
                   and congenital anomalies such as cardiac (20–35%), VATER, and VACTERL associations (see above).

                    Respiratory              The upper esophageal pouch should be suctioned to minimize aspiration. These patients
                                             frequently have respiratory insufficiency 2° prematurity (RDS), or aspiration pneumonitis,
                                             and may be intubated and on mechanical ventilation. Single-lung ventilation is typically
                                             not tolerated in small babies, and unnecessary surgical working space is created by regu-
                                             lated pneumothorax for thoracoscopy or retraction for open surgery.
                                             Tests: CXR, ABG

===== PAGE 1290 =====
1290   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Cardiovascular            Associated cardiac abnormalities include VSD, PDA, tetralogy of Fallot, ASD, and coarc-
                                                             tation of the aorta. At risk for pulmonary HTN with R → L shunt. In ductal-dependent
                                                             patients, maintain prostaglandin infusion (PGE1).
                                                             Tests: ECHO

                                   Gastrointestinal          Associated GI anomalies may occur (e.g., imperforate anus, midgut malrotation, duodenal
                                                             atresia, pyloric stenosis).

                                   Musculoskeletal           Musculoskeletal anomalies are usually of little anesthetic significance, except for possible
                                                             C-spine involvement.

                                   Hematologic               For the first 2–3 mo of life, the O2-carrying capacity of blood is increased because of the
                                                             presence of fetal Hb with its ↓ sensitivity to 2,3-DPG. A shift to the right of the O2 sat curve
                                                             results in ↑ O2-Hb affinity. As a result, tissue oxygenation may be reduced, especially with
                                                             anemia (Hb < 12 g/dL @ < 2–3 mo). Although TEF repair is not usually associated with
                                                             significant blood loss, a T&C is indicated. Patients should be well hydrated and should have
                                                             adequate urine output.
                                                             Tests: Hct; T&C; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Laboratory                Serum electrolytes, ABG, blood glucose, to determine metabolic state.

                                   Premedication             Usually none

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA for thoracoscopy, using a pediatric circuit. Warm room to 75–80°F and use forced-
                                   air warmer. If thoracotomy, the child is otherwise healthy and extubation is planned within 48 h, consider placing
                                   a caudal or lumbar epidural catheter (see p. D-4) after airway is secured and the child is anesthetized. Patients with
                                   large fistulas may need awake gastrostomy or a Fogarty catheter placed via the gastrostomy, using FOB, to occlude
                                   the distal end of the fistula. Alternatively, the Fogarty catheter can be used to occlude the proximal end of the fistula
                                   via the trachea.

                                   Induction                 Atropine (0.02 mg/kg iv in children < 1 mo, minimum 0.1 mg) is given before induction
                                                             to ablate vagal response to laryngoscopy. Traditionally, spontaneous ventilation is advo-
                                                             cated to minimize gastric distention; however, most cases will do well with iv induction. IV
                                                             induction may be performed with care during ventilation to minimize PIP and potential
                                                             inflation of stomach. Advance ETT to right mainstem and withdraw until bilateral breath
                                                             sounds are present. Rotate ETT so the bevel faces posteriorly (to prevent intubation of
                                                             the fistula). If rigid bronchoscopy is performed after induction, place ETT 1 cm above
                                                             where fistula was visualized. Otherwise, have flexible pediatric bronchoscope available to
                                                             verify placement of ETT and site of TEF. Keep air leak around ETT to a minimum (leak at
                                                             18–35 cmH2O) to minimize alterations in ventilation 2° changes in chest and pulmonary
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                             compliance. The depth of the TEF should be noted on the initial rigid bronchoscopy. This
                                                             depth guides ETT placement intraop and any postop attempts at reintubation that can be
                                                             catastrophic if the ETT is advanced through the fistula repair.

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance with inhalational anesthetic, TIVA, or combination. Avoid high
                                                             FiO2 if possible in premature neonates at risk for retinopathy. Use air/O2 mixture for ven-
                                                             tilation to maintain O2 sat between 95% and 100%. Use low PIPs to avoid gastric distention
                                                             by gases passing through fistula. Careful adjustment of ventilation will be necessary during
                                                             surgical retraction of lung or during insufflation if procedure is done thoracoscopically.
                                                             Manual ventilation may be helpful in assessing pulmonary compliance. If the patient is not
                                                             tolerating manipulation by the surgeon, brief breaks may be necessary to restore ventilation
                                                             and oxygenation. Muscle relaxation (rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg iv, vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg iv)
                                                             is usually necessary. If epidural is used, GA drug requirements will be reduced. Frequent
                                                             tracheal suctioning may be needed.

                                   Emergence                 Patients usually remain intubated. Opioid-sparing techniques and either thoracoscopic
                                                             surgery or the use of regional anesthesia may facilitate earlier extubation. Reintubation
                                                             may compromise the new anastomosis.

===== PAGE 1291 =====
Repair of Tracheoesophageal Fistula and Esophageal Atresia                   1291

                    Blood and fluid             Blood loss usually minimal                  Continue dextrose-containing solution from NICU.
                       requirements             IV: 22–24 ga × 2                            Replace 3rd-space losses (6–8 mL/kg/h) with NS/
                                                NS/LR (maintenance)                         LR. Replace blood loss with 5% albumin mL for mL;
                                                (see p. D-3).                               maintain Hct > 35%.
                                                5% albumin

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1).             ABG, Hct, and glucose q 60 min. Consider preduc-
                                                Arterial line (24 ga)                       tal, postductal SaO2 in premature neonates or those
                                                                                            with cardiac lesions.

                    Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   The patient is turned to the left-lateral decubitus
                                                3 eyes                                      position for a right thoracotomy. Monitor breath
                                                Axillary roll                               sounds in dependent lung. Consider using FOB to
                                                                                            recheck tube position.

                    Complications               Hypothermia
                                                Metabolic acidosis
                                                Hypoxemia                                   Migration of ETT above fistula may lead to gastric
                                                Aspiration/gastric insufflation             insufflation and difficult ventilation.
                                                Pneumothorax
                                                Mucus plug                                  Typically in ETT or large bronchi

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications               Apnea/hypoventilation                       Maintenance of normothermia lessens incidence of
                                                Pneumothorax                                apnea, hypoventilation, and metabolic acidosis.
                                                Tracheal leak
                                                Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury            Spontaneous hip flexion is the most reliable indica-
                                                Pneumonia                                   tion of adequate neuromuscular function.

                    Pain                        Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg q 1–2 h)
                      management                Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg q 1–2 h)
                                                Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv/po q 6; 20 mg/kg PR q 6; one-time dose perioperatively
                                                30–40 mg/kg pr)

                    Tests                       ABG; Hct

                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                     1. Brett C, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general surgery in the neonate. In: Davis PT, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Publishing, Philadelphia: 2011, 574–78.
                     2. Broemling N, Campbell F: Anesthetic management of congenital tracheoesophageal fistula. Pediatric Anesthesia 2011;
                        21:1092–99.
                     3. Diaz LK, Akpek EA, Dinavahi R, et al: Tracheoesophageal fistula and associated congenital heart disease: implications for
                        anesthetic management and survival. Pediatr Anesth 2005; 15:862–69.
                     4. Holcomb GW III, Rothenberg SS, Bax KM, et al: Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: a
                        multi-institutional analysis. Ann Surg 2005; 242(3):422–8.
                     5. Knotten G, Costi D, Stephens P: An audit of anesthetic management and complications of trachea-esophageal fistula and
                        esophageal atresia repair. Pediatr Anesth 2012; 22:268–74.
                     6. Krosnar S, Baxter A: Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula: anesthetic and intensive care
                        management of a series of eight neonates. Pediatric Anesthesia 2005; 15:541–6.
                     7. Liu LM, Pang LM: Neonatal surgical emergencies in anesthesiology. Clin North Am 2001; 19(2):272–6.
                     8. Morton NS, Fairgrieve R, Moores A, et al: Anesthesia for the full-term and ex-premature infant. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos
                        DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthsia 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 506–10.
                     9. Motoyama EK, Davis PJ, eds: Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 7th edition. Mosby-Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2006,
                        550–2.
                    10. Rice-Townsend S, Ramamoorthy C, Dutta S: Thoracoscopic repair of a type D esophageal atresia in a newborn with complex
                        congenital heart disease. J Pediatr Surg 2007; 42(9):1616–9.

===== PAGE 1292 =====
1292   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Mediastinal Mass—Biopsy or Resection
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Mass lesions in the mediastinum are
                                   classified as anterior, middle, and posterior, based on
                                   their relationship to the heart, which occupies the mid-
                                   dle mediastinum. Anterior tumors include lympho-
                                   mas, thyroid tumors, teratomas, and thymomas. Large
                                   lymphomas and, less commonly, teratomas or meta-
                                   static germ cell tumors may cause anterior mediasti-
                                   nal mass syndrome and/or SVC compression. Preop
                                   preparation includes a rigid bronchoscope, plans to
                                   advance the ETT into a mainstem bronchus, and con-
                                   sideration of the need to rapidly roll the patient prone.
                                   These masses often are approached through a 3rd-rib
                                   anterior mediastinotomy (Chamberlain procedure)
                                   or thoracoscopically. For patients with compromised
                                   airway, light sedation and core-needle biopsy after ap-
                                   propriate imaging (e.g., MRI or CT scan) are prefer-
                                   able. Middle mediastinal tumors include esophageal
                                   duplications, bronchogenic cysts, lymphangiomas and
                                   variants, pericardial cysts, and lymph nodes. They are
                                   typically approached through a 5th intercostal space
                                   posterolateral thoracotomy or thoracoscopically. Pos-
                                                                                                              Miscellaneous 8%
                                   terior mediastinal lesions are usually neurogenic tu-
                                   mors; less commonly, neuroenteric cysts. The former
                                   may communicate with the spinal cord through the
                                   intervertebral foramina, giving them the appearance         Figure 12.5-2. Distribution of mediastinal cysts
                                   of central narrowing (“dumbbell tumor”). They usu-          and tumor. (Reprinted with permission from
                                   ally arise from the sympathetic ganglia, and when high      Ravitch MM, et al: Pediatric Surgery. Year Book
                                   in the chest, excision may cause Horner’s syndrome.         Medical Publishers, Chicago: 1986.)
                                   They are approached thoracoscopically or via postero-
                                   lateral thoracotomy.

                                   Surgical approach: The potential for blood loss and airway compromise must always be anticipated when oper-
                                   ating on chest lesions adjacent to the great vessels and tracheobronchial tree. When SVC or anterior mediastinal
                                   mass syndromes are suspected, they may be confirmed clinically and should be discussed among surgeon, anesthe-
                                   siologist, and oncologist. Thoracoscopy is the gold standard for biopsy. In the absence of an adequate workspace,
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   a mini-thoracotomy may be necessary, but adequate biopsy for diagnostic purposes can typically be achieved with
                                   core needle biopsy. For resection, thoracotomy or median sternotomy is performed based on location of the tumor.
                                   A chest tube is typically left in place after resection or biopsy to drain the pleural space and ensure lung expansion
                                   postop.

                                   Variant Procedure: In the past, it was a dictum that at least 1 cm2 of tumor was needed for architecture to diag-
                                   nose and classify lymphomas. In the age of histochemistry and chromosomal studies, this is less true. Sometimes the
                                   Dx can be made on bone marrow aspirate, pleural effusion aspirate, or a Tru-Cut needle biopsy. These alternatives
                                   should be considered when large anterior mediastinal masses are encountered. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided nee-
                                   dle biopsy is an accepted technique for lesions near the esophagus. A new technique of transesophageal endoscopic
                                   surgery has been used for excision of mediastinal lymph nodes and masses.

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Neuroblastoma; teratoma; duplication cyst of foregut; mediastinal mass (lymphoma)

===== PAGE 1293 =====
Mediastinal Mass—Biopsy or Resection   1293

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Lateral Thoracotomy                                           Median Sternotomy

                     Position                 Lateral                                                       Supine or semirecumbent

                     Incision                 Posterolateral                                                Median, parasternal

                     Special                  None                                                          Bronchoscope; ± CPB
                       instrumentation

                     Unique considerations Airway or cardiovascular collapse after induction in anterior    ⇐
                                           mediastinal masses

                     Antibiotics              Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg iv;      ⇐
                                              intraop: cephalosporin irrigation (1 g/500 mL NS)

                     Surgical time            2–4 h                                                         1–4 h

                     Closing                  Lung inflation; intercostal block; epidural catheter          ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                      10–30 mL/kg                                                   10–50 mL/kg

                     Postop care              Aggressive respiratory therapy; analgesia                     ⇐

                     Mortality                < 5%, except symptomatic anterior masses                      ⇐

                     Morbidity                Atelectasis/respiratory                                       ⇐
                                              Cardiovascular collapse with anterior masses                  ⇐

                     Pain score               7–8                                                           6–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–teens

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               1/5000

                     Etiology                Unknown

                     Associated              Cervical or axillary cystic hygroma; hemangioma; SVC syndrome
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery

                   The clinical presentation of a mediastinal mass is often nonspecific in an otherwise healthy child. Often, a routine
                   CXR (for some incidental Sx) will show the presence of an anterior mediastinal mass. These patients may suffer acute
                   cardiorespiratory compromise on induction of anesthesia. A careful preop workup is essential. The presence of orthop-
                   nea, dyspnea, use of accessory muscles of ventilation, or upper body edema may indicate compression of trachea and/
                   or great vessels and increase risk of anesthesia-related complications. Radiological evaluation, including CXR, CT or
                   MRI, and ECHO will be essential in guiding treatment plan.

                   For large masses, consider rigid bronchoscopy and/or CPB standby. If severity of symptoms and size of tumor pre-
                   clude anesthesia, possible options include preop radiation therapy or steroids. Both of these therapies will decrease
                   tumor mass and relieve airway obstruction, but will interfere with accurate histologic diagnosis.

                   Current practice is to obtain a diagnostic biopsy under light sedation, due to concern for airway compromise.
                   Treatment is then initiated to decrease tumor burden. Patients may return after treatment for resection of residual
                   tumor.

===== PAGE 1294 =====
1294   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Respiratory             Respiratory Sx (e.g., dyspnea, cough, stridor, wheezing) are extremely important. Note
                                                           that, when mild airway compromise is present in the awake patient, this can indicate that
                                                           total obstruction may occur when the patient is anesthetized or after muscle relaxation.
                                                           The ability to lie supine without respiratory compromise should be determined, but does
                                                           not guarantee adequate air exchange after receiving sedation or anesthesia. Tracheal and
                                                           bronchial compression from the tumor may be positional.
                                                           Tests: CXR; chest CT/MRI; echocardiogram; supine-sitting flow/volume loops can be use-
                                                           ful for evaluating location and extent of airway obstruction in patients who are cooperative
                                                           > 5 yr; oxygen saturation or ABG is indicated if symptomatic.

                                   Cardiovascular          May include SVC syndrome (e.g., venous engorgement of head and neck, edema of upper
                                                           body). Other Sx and signs may include syncope and headaches (↑ ICP) made worse in
                                                           the supine position, JVD, papilledema. Cardiac insufficiency may occur due to tumor
                                                           compression.
                                                           NB: In severely symptomatic patients or large mediastinal masses, consider necessity for
                                                           cardiopulmonary fem-fem bypass standby.
                                                           Tests: ECHO

                                   Laboratory              Electrolytes; CBC; If resection, T&C for 2–4 U, depending on body weight and tumor size;
                                                           other tests as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication           IV premedication with midazolam (0.02–0.05 mg/kg). Use premedication cautiously espe-
                                                           cially in patients with large masses, or those that are symptomatic.

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA using pediatric circle. OR temperature 75–80°; forced-air warmer.

                                   Induction               For diagnostic biopsy, the usual practice is light sedation with ketamine/midazolam and/
                                                           or dexmedetomidine/midazolam, with generous infiltration of local anesthetic by the sur-
                                                           geons. If patient has undergone treatment, tumor has decreased in size, and there is no
                                                           risk for airway compromise, a standard iv induction is appropriate. An iv is mandatory.
                                                           If SVC syndrome is present, it is important to have iv access in the lower extremity. An
                                                           awake FOB and intubation in the sitting position may be necessary. A mask induction with
                                                           sevoflurane/O2 in the semi-Fowler’s (reclining) position may also be performed. Intubation
                                                           should be performed with preservation of spontaneous ventilation. Have small styletted
                                                           ETTs available, in the event of tracheal compression. Use muscle relaxants with caution
                                                           because the change from spontaneous to positive pressure ventilation may not be toler-
                                                           ated and may lead to obstruction. Be prepared for obstruction distal to ETT. If obstruc-
                                                           tion occurs, gently pushing a smaller ETT into the R mainstream bronchus may alleviate
                                                           obstruction. Rigid bronchoscopy/one lung ventilation may be needed.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                           NB: Surgeon must be present (with rigid bronchoscope immediately available) in the
                                                           event of acute airway obstruction on induction. If obstruction is unabated, options include
                                                           median sternotomy and femoral access for CPB.
                                                           NB: A simple positional change (e.g., supine to lateral, prone or sitting) may relieve cardio-
                                                           respiratory collapse.

                                   Maintenance             Spontaneous ventilation/assisted ventilation with volatile agent and 100% O2 may be
                                                           appropriate. Supplemental epidural analgesia may be administered if a major resection
                                                           is planned as opposed to a small incision for biopsy (see p. D-2). Have surgeon infiltrate
                                                           wound with local anesthetic to reduce volatile anesthetic and opiate requirements.

                                   Emergence               Confirm air leak around ETT (with cuff deflated). Have all emergency airway equipment
                                                           available and surgeon present. Patient should be fully awake before extubation.

===== PAGE 1295 =====
Neonatal Lung Resection          1295

                    Blood and fluid            Usually minimal blood loss                If mediastinoscopy is performed, sudden blood loss
                       requirements            IV: 18–24 ga × 2, depending on age        from torn great vessel may occur.
                                               NS/LR @ maintenance (see p. D-1)
                                               T&C for major resections

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)            Esophageal or precordial stethoscope is earliest
                                               ± Arterial line                           monitor of airway obstruction. Preop a-line may be
                                                                                         indicated in patients with large masses or in symp-
                                                                                         tomatic patients.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                    Complications              Cardio/respiratory failure                If obstruction worsens acutely, be prepared to
                                               Loss of airway                            change to lateral-decubitus or prone position,
                                               Hypotension                               which may help alleviate tracheal, bronchial com-
                                                                                         pression and cardiovascular collapse. These cases
                                                                                         require great attention to detail. All efforts must be
                                                                                         made to maintain spontaneous ventilation. Prepa-
                                                                                         rations must be made for resuscitation.

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Respiratory failure                       Anesthesiologist must be readily available in the
                                               Pneumothorax                              PACU to manage acute airway problems.

                    Pain                       Ketorolac 0.5 mg/kg (up to 30 mg)         Cervical biopsy/mediastinoscopy have minimal
                      management               iv q 6 h × 24 h                           postop pain and can be effectively treated with
                                               Epidural analgesia                        NSAID and local anesthetic infiltration.
                                               PCA (see pp. E-3–E-4)                     Use opiates cautiously.

                    Tests                      Hct, ABG, CXR, as clinically indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Anghelescu DL, Burgoyne LL, Liu T, et al: Clinical and diagnostic imaging findings predict anesthetic complications in
                        children presenting with malignant mediastinal masses. Pediatr Anesth 2007; 17(11):1090–8.
                     2. Golianu B, Hammer GB: Pediatric thoracic anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesth 2005; 18(1):5–11.
                     3. Hack HA, Wright NB, Wynn RF: The anesthetic management of children with anterior mediastinal masses. Anesthesia 2008;
                        63:837–46.
                     4. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracic, urologic, and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PT,
                        Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Pub, Philadelphia: 2011,

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                        772–78.
                     5. Hammer GB: Anesthetic management for the child with a mediastinal mass. Pediatric Anaesth 2004; 14:95–7.
                     6. McJadyen G, Budac S, Richards M, et al: Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Gregory’s
                        Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 580–3.
                     7. Narang S, Harte BH, Body SC: Anesthesia for patients with a mediastinal mass. Anesth Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):559–79.
                     8. Tsao K, St Peter SD, Sharp SW, et al: Current application of thoracoscopy in children. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2008;
                        18(1):131–5.

                   Neonatal Lung Resection
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Neonatal lung resection is performed for a few disorders relatively unique to children, including con-
                   genital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM); sequestrations (intralobar 75%, extralobar 25%); congenital lobar
                   overdistention (CLO, formerly called “emphysema”); and congenital pulmonary cysts (Fig. 12.5-3). Many lesions are

===== PAGE 1296 =====
1296   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                               Figure 12.5-3. Classic developmental abnormalities of the tracheobronchial tree.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Oldham KT, Colombani PM, Foglia RP: Surgery of
                                               Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven, 1997. After Haller JA Jr, Golladay ES, Pickard
                                               LR, et al: Surgical management of lung bud anomalies: lobar emphysema, bronchogenic
                                               cyst, cystic adenomatoid malformation, and intralobar pulmonary sequestration. Ann
                                               Thorac Surg 1979; 28:34.)

                                   a symptomatic; they are diagnosed by antenatal ultrasound or later when a CXR is performed for other reasons. CPAMs
                                    may compromise respiration, develop infections, and have a small but real risk of malignant degeneration. Sequestra-
                                    tions have little long-term risk, but they are frequently fed by a large systemic artery of near-aortic caliber (often from
                                    below the diaphragm) with independent venous drainage back into the vena cava, causing significant L → R shunting.
                                    CLO resection is performed when the volume of ineffective, dilated lung compresses adjacent functioning lobes, com-
                                    promising their function. (This condition is worsened by positive pressure ventilation.) The key therapy is surgical—
                                    opening the hemithorax enables an oversized lobe to herniate through the incision, decompressing the healthy lung
                                    beneath. Most resections are performed on a ventilated lung because it is difficult to selectively intubate small airways.
                                   Surgical approach: Patients undergoing lateral thoracotomy through the 4th, 5th, or 6th intercostal space benefit
                                   from preop placement of an epidural catheter. In some institutions, thoracoscopic resection may be performed. Signifi-
                                   cant blood loss is possible (infrequent). Often ventilation improves when the aberrant lung segment is removed. A large
                                   CPAM, intralobar sequestration, or CLO usually requires formal lobectomy. Smaller CPAMs, pulmonary cysts, and
                                   extralobar sequestrations are treated with lesser resections. A chest tube usually is left in place at the end of the case to
                                   drain the pleural cavity and promote lung expansion.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Variant procedures or approaches: Thoracoscopic lobectomy is increasingly the technique of choice for lung
                                   resections. It can be performed safely and effectively and avoids the morbidity and poor cosmesis of a thoracotomy.
                                   Upper-lobe resections can be technically more challenging, but are still possible with thoracoscopy. Insufflation of
                                   the hemithorax with 7 mm Hg carbon dioxide can aid in lung collapse. Some argue for observation of asymptomatic
                                   low-risk cystic lung lesions, but the criteria for observation are yet to be rigorously studied.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: CPAM; sequestration; CLO; pulmonary cysts; congenital diaphragmatic hernia;
                                   pneumothorax

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                              Thoracotomy                                      Thoracoscopy

                                    Position                 Lateral decubitus                                 ⇐

                                    Incision                 Lateral thoracotomy                               ⇐

                                    Special                  Pediatric rib retractor                           4 mm 30° scope
                                      instrumentation

===== PAGE 1297 =====
Neonatal Lung Resection        1297

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                             Thoracotomy                                       Thoracoscopy

                     Unique                 Rapid thoracotomy improves ventilation in          Controlled pneumothorax creates work-
                       considerations       CLO. Aggressive high-pressure ventilation          ing space but can increase CO2 through
                                            should be avoided.                                 absorption.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg                                 ⇐

                     Surgical time          2h                                                 2–3 h

                     Closing                Extubation preferable and aided by epidural        Extubation preferable, intercostal block, epi-
                       considerations       catheter.                                          dural unnecessary

                     EBL                    10 mL/kg                                           5 mL

                     Postop care            NICU                                               NICU/PICU

                     Mortality              < 5%                                               < 2%

                     Morbidity              Bleeding                                           ⇐
                                            Air leak
                                            Atelectasis
                                            pneumothorax

                     Pain score             7–8                                                4–5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Days-weeks

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              1/5000 live births

                     Etiology               Bronchopulmonary foregut maldifferentiation

                     Associated             Extralobar sequestration: may occur below the diaphragm.
                       conditions           Sequestrations: may be associated with high-output heart failure and diaphragmatic hernia.
                                            CCAM: may cause hydrops fetalis and fetal death. Intermediate forms of sequestration and CCAM exist.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery
                   In general, children have significantly decreased respiratory reserve compared with adults because:

                     1. FRC is closer to RV in children, thereby making airway closure more likely.
                     2. O2 consumption is higher (6–8 mL/kg/min vs. 3 mL/kg/min).
                     3. In adults, the decubitus position increases blood flow to the ventilated, dependent lung, while decreasing perfusion
                        to the operated nondependent lung. In children, the nondependent lung may actually receive greater perfusion
                        than the dependent lung, which may be due to a more compliant chest wall in infants and young children.

                    Premedication            None usually needed. In older infants > 7–9 mo, consider midazolam 0.5 mg/kg or
                                             1–2 mg iv. If airway obstruction or severe pulmonary disease is present, use premedication
                                             judiciously.

                        INTRAOPERATivE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, forced-air warmer; OR warmed to 75–80°F; use warming pad on OR table, and warm
                   iv fluids. Consider epidural if thoracotomy.

===== PAGE 1298 =====
1298   c h a p t e r 12.5           Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Induction                         Either inhalation or iv induction may be performed. (For OLV, see below.) The trachea is
                                                                     intubated. An arterial line is indicated for children having a thoracotomy and for VATS
                                                                     in patients with significant lung disease. A CVP is generally not required if iv access is
                                                                     adequate.

                                   One-lung ventil-                  OLV is used to allow deflation of the operative lung, which is especially useful during
                                     ation (OLV)                     VATS. Alternatively, the surgeon may insufflate CO2 to compress the operative lung. OLV
                                     in pediatric                    also isolates the lungs to help prevent contamination of the nonoperative lung with blood
                                     patients                        or purulent fluid from the operative lung.
                                                                     The three techniques for OLV in infants and children include the following:
                                                                     Use of a single-lumen tube: a single-lumen tube is advanced into the mainstem bronchus
                                                                     of the nonoperative lung. FOB may be placed through ETT to confirm placement. Disad-
                                                                     vantages: may obstruct upper lobe bronchus; cannot suction operative lung; may not have
                                                                     complete collapse of operative lung.
                                                                     Use of a bronchial blocker: For placing blocker OUTSIDE the ETT: Operative lung intu-
                                                                     bated with ETT, guide wire passed through ETT, BB advanced over guide wire; second
                                                                     smaller ETT placed in trachea, alongside the BB. BB also can be advanced under direct
                                                                     visualization with FOB guidance via ETT. For placing blocker THROUGH ETT, multiport
                                                                     adapters allow oxygenation while positioning. Disadvantages: requires small ETT, FOB, or
                                                                     fluoroscopy. If bronchial blocker not available, consider balloon tipped Fogarty catheter.
                                                                     Care must be taken to not place a bronchial blocker too deep in a small infant as it can be
                                                                     inadvertently incorporated into the surgical closure of the bronchus.
                                                                     Use of a double-lumen tube (DLT): Can be placed for older children (see table below for
                                                                     approximate sizes). (See Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, for details.)

                                   Maintenance                       Standard maintenance (see p. D-3). Muscle relaxation is appropriate. Inhalation agent or
                                                                     TIVA (see p. B-3) may be used; 100% O2 or O2/air mixture; N2O is avoided. Fentanyl 2–5
                                                                     mcg/kg or other iv opioid should be given if epidural is not in place.

                                   Emergence                         In most cases, the patient can be extubated at the end of surgery. An OG tube should be
                                                                     placed before and suctioned prior to extubation. Ensure ability to oxygenate and ventilate
                                                                     adequately before extubation.

                                   Blood and fluid                   IV: 20–22 ga × 2                      Potential for moderate blood loss. Transfuse to
                                      requirements                   NS/LR @ maintenance                   maintain Hct > 23. If > 2 mo of age, dextrose-con-
                                                                                                           taining solutions are not required.

                                   Table 12.5-1. Tube Selection for OLV in Children
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                  ETT (Inner             Fogarty             Bronchial
                                   Age (yr)                       Diameter)              Catheter            Blocker            Univent Tube    DLT (Fr)
                                   0.5–1                          3.5–4.0                3                   2(a)
                                   1–2                            4.0–4.5                4                   3(a)
                                   2–4                            4.5–5.0                4                   5(b)
                                   4–6                            5.0–5.5                5                   5(b)
                                   6–8                            5.5–6                  6                   5(b)               3.5
                                   8–10                           6.0 cuffed             6                   5(b)               3.5             26
                                   10–12                          6.5 cuffed             6                   5(b)               4.5             26–28
                                   12–14                          6.5–7.0 cuffed         6                   5(b)               4.5             32
                                   14–16                          7.0 cuffed             7                   5,7(b)             6.0             35
                                   16–18                          7.0–8.0 cuffed         7                   7,9(b)             7.0             35–37
                                   (a) Edwards Life Science, LLC. Irvine, CA
                                   (b) Cook Critical Care, Inc., Bloomington, IN.

===== PAGE 1299 =====
Drainage of Empyema          1299

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).           For thoracotomy, ABG, Hct, and glucose should be
                                              ± Arterial line (22 ga)                   evaluated as clinically indicated; UO monitored and
                                              Foley catheter                            kept at 1 mL/kg/h.

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes

                    Complications             Hypoxia                                   DDX: Movement of ETT or BB, bronchospasm;
                                                                                        obstruction of ETT by kinking or secretions; pre-
                                                                                        existing disease.
                                              Hypercarbia                               Permissible during OLV (40–50 mm Hg) to mini-
                                                                                        mize barotrauma.
                                              ↓ BP                                      Blood loss; hypovolemia; ↓ venous return 2° ↑ intra-
                                                                                        thoracic pressure

                          POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications             Atelectasis
                                              Hypoventilation
                                              Hypoxia                                   Supplemental O2
                                              Pneumothorax                              Check breath sounds, chest wall motion, CXR. May
                                                                                        require chest tube.

                    Pain                      Thoracic epidural                         Lumbar (or caudal if < 8 kg and < 1 yr) epidural
                      management                                                        catheter may be placed and threaded up to thoracic
                                                                                        levels. (NB- 1st dilate space with NS prior to thread-
                                                                                        ing catheter; ultrasound guidance may also be used
                                                                                        to guide placement.)
                                              Ketorolac 0.5 mg/kg iv q 6 h ×            max 30 mg/dose, if needed to enhance analgesia
                                              48–72 h

                    Tests                     Hct
                                              ABG
                                              CXR

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Dinesh K: Single lung ventilation in pediatric anesthesia. Anesth Clin North Am 2005; 23:693–708.
                     2. Gregory GA, ed: Pediatric Anesthesia, 4th edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2002, 428–34.
                     3. Hammer GB: Single lung ventilation in infants and children. Pediatr Anesth 2004; 14:98–102.
                     4. Hammer GB, Harrison TK, Vricella LA, et al: Single lung ventilation in children using a new paediatric bronchial blocker.
                        Pediatr Anesth 2002; 12:69–72.

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                     5. Rothenberg SS, Albanese CT: Experience with 144 consecutive pediatric thoracoscopic lobectomies. J Laparoendosc Adv
                        Surg Tech A 2007; 17(3):339–41.

                   Drainage of Empyema
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Most empyemas occur in otherwise healthy children when a necrotizing pneumonia causes a para-
                   pneumonic effusion that becomes infected. The infected fluid (empyema) has the tendency to become solid over
                   days to weeks. It compresses the diseased lung and responds poorly to antibiotics because it is remote from the
                   circulatory system. Three phases of empyema are recognized, and the key variable determining outcome is fibrin.

===== PAGE 1300 =====
1300   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   The early or exudative phase occurs when the effusion becomes purulent—liquid pus without fibrin is success-
                                   fully treated with a chest tube if it is recognized early (uncommon). The second phase, fibrinopurulent, occurs
                                   over the next days as thick strands of infected fibrin replace exudative fluid. It is the most common phase and is
                                   most expeditiously treated by thoracoscopic ± open empyemectomy. The last phase, organized, occurs when all
                                   exudate has been replaced by thick, infected fibrin, compressing the lung and adhering to both visceral and parietal
                                   pleura. Fortunately, this stage is rare in children; tedious thoracoscopic decortication may be successful, but often
                                   thoracotomy is required and the procedure is bloody. Some previously common organisms (e.g., Haemophilius
                                   influenzae) are decreasing with the advent of pediatric vaccines; Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus aureus,
                                   and Streptococcus pyogenes remain common pathogens, joined more recently by gram-negative rods. Significant
                                   bleeding is not uncommon, and bronchopleural fistulae, if not already present, may occur when dead lung adheres
                                   to débrided overlying fibrin.
                                   Surgical approach: Ipsilateral long-term venous access (peripherally inserted central or subclavian catheter) is
                                   placed before or during surgery. In larger children, a BB may protect the healthy lung from pus, which may extrude
                                   from the infected side into the trachea during operation. A two- or three-port thoracoscopic technique is most
                                   common, aided by hermetic trocars used with 5 mm Hg intrathoracic pressure (unless a bronchopleural fistula ex-
                                   ists). The first port is placed into a preexisting chest tube site or the largest known pocket of pus/fibrin observed
                                   on preop imaging. Gradually, this space is enlarged until the remaining ports can be inserted under direct vision.
                                   As fibrin and pus are removed, trapped lung is liberated, and the procedure continues somewhat tediously until
                                   the entire lung is free and most fibrin is removed. One or two large-bore chest tubes are placed at the end of the
                                   procedure.
                                   Alternate approach is placement of one or more pigtail chest tubes and flushing the chest cavity with a fibrinolytic
                                   agent (e.g., tissue plasminogen activator). There is debate whether this approach may result in longer hospital stays,
                                   and thoracoscopy remains the gold standard.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Thoracoscopic                                  Thoracotomy

                                    Position                Contralateral decubitus                        ⇐

                                    Incision                Three ports                                    5th interspace

                                    Special                 Suction irrigator; chest tube                  Rib retractor; suction; chest tube
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  5 mm Hg capnothorax                            —
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             Cefuroxime (25 mg/kg) and clindamycin (10      ⇐
                                                            mg/kg)

                                    Surgical time           1.5 h                                          2h
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Closing                 Local anesthetic                               ± Epidural catheter
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                     10–20 mL/kg                                    ⇐

                                    Postop care             May be septic for 24 h                         ⇐
                                                            Extubation ideal                               ⇐

                                    Mortality               < 5%                                           < 10% when used for advanced disease

                                    Morbidity               Air leak                                       ⇐
                                                            Bleeding                                       ⇐
                                                            Sepsis                                         ⇐
                                                            Atelectasis                                    ⇐
                                                            Pneumatocele                                   ⇐

                                    Pain score              3–4                                            7–8

===== PAGE 1301 =====
Repair of Pectus Excavatum/Carinatum           1301

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               1–17 yr

                     Male: Female            1:1

                     Incidence               1/150 pneumonias

                     Etiology                Bacteria infect pleural effusion.

                     Associated              Chronic granulomatous disease (uncommon)
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Neonatal Lung Resection for guidelines for OLV, p. 1297.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Choudry DK: Single lung ventilation in pediatric anesthesia. Anesth Clin North Am 2005; 23:693–708.
                     2. Fuller MK, Helmrath MA: Thoracic empyema, application of video-assisted thoracic surgery and its current management.
                        Curr Opin Pediatr 2007; 19(3):328–32.
                     3. Golianu B, Hammer GB: Pediatric thoracic anesthesia. Curr Opin Anesth 2005; 18(1):5–11.

                   Repair of Pectus Excavatum/Carinatum
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pectus excavatum (“funnel chest”) is a sternochondral deformity more common in boys and of
                   greater frequency than pectus carinatum (“pigeon chest”). Both may be associated with scoliosis, spontaneous
                   pneumothorax, and Marfan syndrome. Severe excavatum lesions may be associated with significant cardio-
                   respiratory compromise. It may be associated with pain, though often the impetus for repair is for cosmetic
                   reasons. The timing of repair is variable; some surgeons preferring to operate on younger children (5–6 yr) be-
                   cause of the ease and decreased bleeding, whereas others prefer doing surgery during adolescence to prevent
                   possible recurrence during puberty.
                   Surgical approach: The classic Ravitch approach involves an omega-shaped chest incision in the supine position.
                   The pectus muscles are detached from the sternum, and 3–5 pairs of costochondral cartilages are resected, leaving
                   the perichondrium for subsequent cartilage regeneration (Fig. 12.5-4). A transverse osteotomy of the upper sternum
                   corrects its appearance. In some excavatum patients, a metal bar or “strut” may be placed beneath the sternum but

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                   on top of the ribs. If used, the strut is removed 2 yr later in a short operation through a small lateral incision. Hemo-
                   vac drains are placed beneath the skin to trap bleeding from cut bony surfaces; chest tube(s) are placed if the pleura
                   or pericardium is violated. Significant blood loss from cut surfaces of bones and cartilage occurs in older patients.
                   A newer approach (Nuss procedure) is now widely practiced. This involves placement of a curvilinear stainless
                   steel bar (pectus bar) via lateral axillary incisions through the rib space under thoracoscopic guidance beneath the
                   sternum at the point of maximal sternal depression. The bar travels through both hemithoraces anterior to the heart
                   and lungs; when “flipped” 180° it exerts powerful forces backward on the ribs and forward on the sternum. Some-
                   times fixation devices must be added to the ribs to keep the bar from “flipping back” into original position. A chest
                   tube is not always necessary; however, very significant pain results, optimally treated with an epidural catheter. The
                   rapid change of chest-wall shape has also caused thoracic outlet syndrome. The downside of both the Ravitch and
                   Nuss procedures is that they try to instantaneously reverse years of bone malformation. A very new approach in the
                   process of FDA approval seeks to reverse PE slowly through the use of magnetic force. A magnet is implanted in
                   the retrosternal space and a complimentary magnetic brace is worn regularly to slowly force the sternum back into
                   normal position.

===== PAGE 1302 =====
1302   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                            Nuss Procedure (Redrawn from Coran (ed.): Pediatric Surgery, 7th edition. Elsevier: 2012.)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                            Figure 12.5-4. Ravitch approach: The costal cartilage immediately above the most cephalad
                                            abnormal costal cartilage is divided obliquely from medial to lateral, as shown. This is often
                                            at the level of the second costal cartilage, at the manubrial-sternal junction. The divided
                                            normal costal cartilages are allowed to overlap, the medial portion being anterior and the
                                            lateral being posterior. Suture fixation of the transected cartilage provides immobilization,
                                            ensuring sternal support at this level (inset). (Reproduced with permission from Oldham
                                            KT, Colombani PM, Foglia RP: Surgery of Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1303 =====
Repair of Pectus Excavatum/Carinatum    1303

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Pectus excavatum; carinatum

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Ravitch                                            Nuss

                     Position              Supine                                             ⇐, R side slightly elevated

                     Incision              Omega, chest                                       Two right axilla, one left axilla

                     Special instruments   Periosteal elevators; sternal saw; possible        Steel bar; bar bender; stabilizers
                                           strut

                     Unique                Heart and lungs beneath                            Cosmetically superior
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics           1st generation cephalosporin                       ⇐

                     Surgical time         ~3 h                                               ≤1h

                     Closing               Extubate; epidural, if possible                    Epidural very important
                       considerations

                     EBL                   10–20 mL/kg                                        < 5 mL/kg

                     Postop care           Drains out 1–3 d → home 5 d                        → home 5 d

                     Mortality             < 2%                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity             Bleeding                                           ⇐
                                           Recurrence                                         Bar “flips”
                                           Pneumothorax                                       Thoracic outlet syndrome
                                           Cardiac injury                                     ⇐

                     Pain score            5–6                                                8–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             5 yr–adolescent

                     Male:Female           5–9:1

                     Incidence             Uncertain

                     Etiology              Relationship with reactive airway disease

                     Associated            Marfan syndrome (5%); mitral valve prolapse (5%)

                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   Pectus excavatum , a condition in which there is concave depression of the lower sternum, may be associated with
                   CHD and restrictive lung disease in severe cases. Usually however, the deformity is primarily cosmetic, and the
                   patient is asymptomatic. Surgery usually occurs between 12 and 15 yr of age. Pectus carinatum (a convex lower
                   sternum) usually is repaired for cosmetic reasons only and usually during the teenage years. Both pectus conditions
                   may be associated with connective tissue disorders (e.g., Marfan’s, Ehler’s, Danlos), therefore CHD may be present.

                    Respiratory             Restrictive lung disease 2° chest-wall deformity may be present in severe deformities. If
                                            patient has exercise limitations, there is a need to differentiate between cardiac and pul-
                                            monary components.
                                            Tests: CXR: AP, lateral; PFTs; ABG, if symptomatic, SaO2

===== PAGE 1304 =====
1304   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Cardiovascular             In both conditions, CHD should be investigated if present. Pulmonary HTN may be 2°
                                                              pulmonary overcirculation (e.g., VSD), or chronic hypoxemia.
                                                              Tests: ECG; ECHO

                                   Laboratory                 Hct; T&C

                                   Premedication              If patient is an asymptomatic child, midazolam (0.5–0.75 mg/kg max 20 mg, or 1–2 mg iv).

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, forced-air warmer; maintain OR temperature 75–80°.

                                   Induction                  IV or mask induction. With restrictive lung disease, there is ↓ FRC, which will shorten the
                                                              time to alveolar equilibration for the volatile anesthetics; institute early manual hyperven-
                                                              tilation. Tracheal intubation, facilitated by neuromuscular blockade (rocuronium 1 mg/kg,
                                                              vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg). Use appropriately sized ETT (see p. D-2).

                                   Maintenance                Standard maintenance with inhalational anesthetic, TIVA or combination. Insertion
                                                              of thoracic epidural catheter will provide for supplemental anesthesia and treatment of
                                                              postop pain and is highly recommended. Usually ropivacaine/clonidine/hydromorphone
                                                              (see App. E). If no epidural is placed, bolus with long acting iv opioid (morphine 0.1 mg/kg,
                                                              hydromorphone 10 mcg/kg) for postoperative pain control, and titrate to effect.

                                   Emergence                  Plan for extubation in OR. Ensure adequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade with neo-
                                                              stigmine (0.07 mg/kg iv) and glycopyrrolate (0.014 mg/kg iv).

                                   Blood and fluid            Usually minimal blood and 3rd-
                                      requirements            space losses
                                                              IV: 18 or 20 ga × 1
                                                              NS/LR @ 3–5 cc/h

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                 Elbow padding to avoid ulnar nerve compression.
                                                              3 eyes                                    Careful positioning to avoid nerve compression.

                                   Complications              Pneumothorax
                                                              Atelectasis

                                       POSTOPERATivE
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Complications              Respiratory insufficiency
                                                              Pneumothorax                              2° splinting, preexisting restrictive pulmonary
                                                              Nerve injury related to positioning       disease

                                   Pain                       Epidural (thoracic) or PCA                Standard epidural infusion. Ketorolac (0.5 mg/kg iv
                                     management               Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg q 6°               q 6 h × 24–72 h), if needed, in addition to the above
                                                                                                        measures (see Appendix E)

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Golianu B, Hammer G: Pediatric thoracic anesthesia. Curr Opin Anesth 2005; 18(1):5–11.
                                     2. Goretsky ML, Kelly RE, Croituru D, et al: Chest wall anomalies: pectus excavatum and pectus carinatum. Adolesc Med Clin
                                        2004; 15(3):455–71.
                                     3. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracic, urologic, and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PT,
                                        Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Pub, Philadelphia: 2011,
                                        764–65.
                                     4. McFadyen G, Budac S, Richards M: Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Gregory’s
                                        Pediatric Anesthesia. Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 581–84.

===== PAGE 1305 =====
Esophageal Replacement, Colon Interposition              1305

                     5. Nuss D, Kelly RE Jr: Indications and technique of Nuss procedure for pectus excavatum. Thorac Surg Clin 2010; 20(4):583–97.
                     6. Obermeyer RJ, Goretsky MJ: Chestwall deformities in pediatric surgery. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(3):669–84.

                   Esophageal Replacement, Colon Interposition
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Esophageal replacement in children usually is performed for caustic stricture or esophageal atresia
                   (EA) refractory to other therapy. Caustic esophageal strictures—usually in toddlers following lye ingestion—are be-
                   coming less common; esophageal replacement is indicated after failed attempts at balloon dilation (BD). Patients
                   with EA may have a primary replacement for known long-gap atresia (Type A) or will have a secondary replacement
                   after failed attempts at anastomosis (all types). There is no good long-term esophageal replacement; a segment of
                   colon, stomach, or (rarely) jejunum is the best surrogate.
                   Surgical approach: Depending on anatomy and surgeon preference, the distal dissection occurs in the abdo-
                   men and/or chest; the proximal anastomosis occurs in the chest or neck. Position changes with redraping may be
                   required, depending on the selection of incisions. The esophageal substitute usually is brought through the bed of
                   the esophagus with small risks to the pulmonary vessels, recurrent laryngeal nerves, and brachiocephalic vein. The
                   retrosternal approach may be safer but is less optimal in children because of long-term problems with obstruction
                   and emptying.
                   Variant procedures or approaches: Colon is the most frequent substitute, with the transverse colon attached
                   to either the R colon (isoperistaltic) or L colon (reverse peristaltic) being used. When the stomach is used, it may be
                   pulled up entirely from the abdomen through the chest with gastroesophageal anastomosis in the neck (Orringer);
                   alternatively, a gastric tube of greater (common) or lesser curve maybe constructed for cervical or thoracic anas-
                   tomosis. Small bowel is used only when other substitutes are inappropriate—because an additional microvascular
                   anastomosis is needed for graft survival.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: EA; caustic stricture

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery

                               Figure 12.5-5. Esophageal replacement using a right colon interposition in a
                               retrosternal position. (Reproduced with permission from Oldham KT, Colombani PM,
                               Foglia RP: Surgery of Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1306 =====
1306   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine, tilted; or supine, ± lateral

                                    Incision               Abdominal and cervical ± thoracotomy

                                    Special                Bougie (upper esophagus)
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics            Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg iv

                                    Surgical time          3–5 h (4–6 h with position change)

                                    EBL                    20–40 mL/kg

                                    Postop care            PICU

                                    Mortality              < 5%

                                    Morbidity              Respiratory failure
                                                           Anastomotic leak
                                                           Sepsis
                                                           Stricture

                                    Pain score             7–8

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              1–5 yr

                                    Male:Female            2:1

                                    Incidence              ~200/yr in the United States

                                    Etiology               Caustic ingestion; EA

                                    Associated             Caustic stricture; imperforate anus; VACTERL association
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATivE
                                   These patients usually are children presenting with a Hx of caustic substance ingestion and subsequent develop-
                                   ment of esophageal stricture. They frequently have undergone multiple esophageal dilations under GA. Previous
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   anesthesia records should be obtained. Preop, these patients are admitted for bowel prep and, consequently, may be
                                   hypovolemic.

                                   Gastrointestinal         Varying degrees of esophageal reflux may be present. Preop H2-blocker administration may
                                                            be appropriate (e.g., ranitidine 1.0 mg/kg iv). If a gastrostomy is present, it should be vented.
                                                            Tests: Electrolytes

                                   Hematologic              Anemia due to poor nutrition
                                                            Tests: CBC; T&C

                                   Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication            IV may already be in place, and midazolam (1–2 mg iv) can be administered in holding
                                                            area. Alternatively, midazolam usually can be given (0.5–0.75 mg/kg po) 30 min. before
                                                            surgery.

===== PAGE 1307 =====
Esophageal Replacement, Colon Interposition           1307

                        INTRAOPERATivE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, forced-air warmer; heating pad on OR table. Warm room to 75–80°F. An epidural
                   catheter (for intraop and postop pain management) may be placed once child is anesthetized and airway is secured.

                    Induction                IV induction preferred. If reflux concerns present, preoxygenate for 2–3 min and perform
                                             rapid-sequence induction and intubation with cricoid pressure (see p. B-5). Use appropri-
                                             ately sized ETT (see p. D-2). Continue neuromuscular blockade with vecuronium (0.1 mg/
                                             kg) or rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg).

                    Maintenance              Use air/O2/isoflurane. Avoid N2O to minimize increase in bowel air, possible pneumotho-
                                             rax related to surgical dissection, use NMB with train-of-four monitoring, and dose epi-
                                             dural catheter as needed (see Appendix E).

                    Emergence                Possible extubation in OR vs. postop intubation.

                    Blood and fluid          Blood loss moderate                      Replace 3rd-space losses with NS/LR (~10 mL/
                       requirements          IV: 22 ga × 2                            kg/h). Replace blood loss mL for mL with albumin
                                             NS/LR @ –10 mL/kg/h                      5%. Transfuse to maintain Hct > 22.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1)
                                             CVP: 4 Fr DL or 5Fr TL or PICC for
                                             postop TPN
                                             ± Arterial line (22 ga)            Marked arterial waveform variation with ventilation
                                             Foley catheter                     is a sensitive indicator of hypovolemia. ABG/Hct prn.

                    Positioning              Shoulder roll                            Beware of tracheal extubation with head exten-
                                             3 and pad pressure points                sion. If necessary, reconfirm ETT position with
                                             3 eyes                                   laryngoscopy.

                    Complications            Hypoventilation                          Suprasternal dissection involves traction on trachea
                                             Hypothermia                              and recurrent laryngeal nerve. Mediastinal pull-
                                             Pneumothorax                             through may damage great vessels and → pneu-
                                             Dysrhythmias                             mothorax, manipulation-induced dysrhythmias,
                                             Aspiration                               impaired chest-wall compliance.

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications            Hypoventilation
                                             Pneumothorax                             Inadequately treated pain → hypoventilation.
                                             Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
                                             Mediastinitis

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                    Pain                     Epidural analgesia (see Appendix E).
                      management             Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv)
                                             Ketorolac (0.5 mg/kg iv up to 15 mg q 6 h × 24–72 h)

                    Tests                    CXR
                                             Hct

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Loukogeorgakis SP, Pierro A: Replacement surgery for esophageal atresia. Eur J Pediatr Surg 2013; 23(3):182–90.
                     2. Schecter NL, Berde CB, Yaster M, eds: Pain in Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 2nd edition. Lippincott, Williams &
                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003, 363–96.

===== PAGE 1308 =====
1308   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Repair of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Posterolateral congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH; Bochdalek hernia) remains a potentially lethal
                                   anomaly due to pulmonary HTN, pulmonary hypoplasia, and associated cardiac dysfunction. In utero Dx allows
                                   for delivery at (ideally) or transport to a tertiary center with sophisticated ventilatory support techniques. Early
                                   NG tube placement is important to minimize distention of the intrathoracic viscera. Surgery transiently worsens
                                   pulmonary HTN and may cause “persistent fetal circulation,” in which the fetal circulation reopens to shunt blood
                                   around the lungs, causing further hypoxemia, hypercarbia, and acidosis—all stimuli for further pulmonary HTN.
                                   Thus, in the sickest newborns, surgery is delayed until after cardiorespiratory stabilization, with the following sup-
                                   portive measures: low-pressure, high-frequency ventilation; passive hypercapnia; oscillating or jet ventilation; NO;
                                   and even ECMO, which is becoming less common with the success of the former methods. When ECMO (with
                                   anticoagulation) is used, diaphragm repair may be performed: early during ECMO (less swelling, more bleeding);
                                   late during ECMO (more swelling, ability to “come off ” if bleeding); or after ECMO (less bleeding, less swelling,
                                   little recourse if surgery worsens ventilation). (For a description of ECMO, see p. 1558.) When the intestines are
                                   reduced from the chest, there is sometimes insufficient room in the abdomen, in which case, an abdominal silo is
                                   placed transiently.
                                   Surgical approach: Left-side lesions (Fig. 12.5-6) are 7× more frequent than right; repair is traditionally performed
                                   through a subcostal incision, but increasingly a laparoscopic or thoracoscopic approach is being utilized. In children
                                   with significant hypercarbia and/or pulmonary hypertension, insufflation with carbon dioxide may not be tolerated,
                                   precluding this approach. However infants are surprisingly resilient to intrathoracic insufflation, and respiratory
                                   acidosis can be effectively managed with hyperventilation.
                                   Small defects cause few ventilation problems and are closed primarily. Larger defects are associated with more chal-
                                   lenging ventilation and require prosthetic mesh augmentation. Recurrent defects may be approached through the
                                   abdomen or chest and sometimes require transfer of muscle flaps (interior oblique). Unless ECMO is used, a chest
                                   tube is not always necessary. Prognosis is determined by severity of associated cardiac lesions or other associated
                                   anomalies. Another reliable predictor of severity (and mortality) is the presence of liver herniation.
                                   Variant procedure: In utero therapies for CDH, including tracheal occlusion, have not been shown to
                                   improve survival. Although the defect commonly originates in the posterolateral diaphragm (Bochdalek), less
                                   common retrosternal defects (Morgagni) present later in life without the same degree of cardiorespiratory
                                   compromise.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Diaphragmatic hernia; Bochdalek’s hernia (posterolateral diaphragm)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine (lateral for thoracic approach)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Incision                Subcostal (posterolateral for thoracic approach)

                                    Special                 Pre- and postductal arterial monitors
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Reactive pulmonary vasculature
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg iv

                                    Surgical time           1–2 h

                                    Closing                 Assess for changes in ventilation (e.g., PIP, pre- and postductal ABG).
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                     5–10 mL/kg

===== PAGE 1309 =====
Repair of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia         1309

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care             Paralysis maintained, high level of paralysis needed on ECMO; hyperventilation; fentanyl infusion
                                             @ 2–5 mcg/kg/min

                     Mortality               15–50% without ECMO
                                             25–30% with ECMO
                                             7% if liver below diaphragm
                                             65% if liver above diaphragm

                     Morbidity               Pulmonary HTN
                                             Respiratory failure
                                             Sepsis
                                             Intestinal obstruction/dysfunction

                     Pain score              6–7 (7–8 for thoracic approach)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–wk or mo

                     Male:Female             1–2:1

                     Incidence               1 in 4000

                     Etiology                Unknown

                     Associated              Malrotation (40–100%); congenital heart disease (23%- VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF); renal anomalies
                       conditions            (rare); esophageal atresia (rare); CNS abnormalities (e.g., myelomeningocele, hydrocephalus)
                                             (rare)

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery

                                Figure 12.5-6. Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia demonstrating translocation
                                of the abdominal viscera into the left hemothorax and displacement of the mediastinum
                                to the contralateral side. (Reproduced with permission from Oldham KT, Colombani PM,
                                Foglia RP: Surgery of Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1310 =====
1310   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATivE
                                   These infants present with varying degrees of respiratory distress. Surgery is performed after the child has been
                                   stabilized medically. The majority are already mechanically ventilated, sedated, and paralyzed in the NICU prior
                                   to anesthesia consultation. Some infants may be on ECMO (see p. 1560). The anesthesiologist needs to be aware
                                   of the distinction between early and late diaphragmatic hernias. Late events (occurring near or even after delivery)
                                   are associated with mature, well-developed lungs and minimal problems with ventilation. These babies often can be
                                   extubated in the early postop period, facilitated by epidural analgesia. Frequently associated with other congenital
                                   abnormalities, including chromosomal abnormalities, CHD.

                                   Respiratory              The lung on affected side is variably hypoplastic, and the lung on the contralateral side
                                                            may be compressed and also may be hypoplastic. Pulmonary hypoplasia is most severe in
                                                            patients with early herniation and may be minimal in cases of late (even postnatal) her-
                                                            niation. The prognosis is correlated with magnitude of pulmonary hypoplasia. Mediasti-
                                                            nal shift may prevent normal development of the contralateral lung. Thickening arterial
                                                            smooth muscle can increase PA pressures, lead to R → L shunting. Persistent pulmonary
                                                            HTN and progressive hypoxemia may be present. Nitric oxide may be indicated to ↓ PVR
                                                            Tests: CXR; ABG

                                   Cardiovascular           Associated congenital heart defects common and should be addressed prior to repair.
                                                            R → L shunting may occur at level of PDA or preductally (e.g., PFO). The degree of R → L
                                                            shunting may be dramatically increased by pulmonary vasoconstriction (2° ↓ PO2, ↑ PCO2,
                                                            ↑ pH, ↑ sympathetic tone) → severe systemic hypoxemia. ↓ CO 2° persistent pulmonary
                                                            HTN and hypoxemia will lead to metabolic acidosis.
                                                            Tests: CXR; ABG; ECHO

                                   Neurological             Myelomeningocele and/or hydrocephalus may be present. Repeated bouts of hypoxemia
                                                            predispose to intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) in preterm infant. These areas of hemor-
                                                            rhage have loss of cerebral autoregulation, and BP increases are directly transmitted to the
                                                            microvasculature, with ↑ risk of recurrent hemorrhage and edema.
                                                            Tests: Head ultrasound

                                   Hematologic              Hct should be maintained at 35%. HbF has ↑ affinity for O2 and ↓ sensitivity to 2,3-DPG.
                                                            This will aggravate cellular hypoxia. Confirm that vitamin K was administered at birth.
                                                            Tests: CBC; T&C; PT; PTT

                                   Metabolic                Dextrose supplementation needed due to negligible glycogen stores in neonate. In patients
                                                            with CHF, diuretic administration leads to ↓ K+.
                                                            Tests: Electrolytes; glucose; BUN; Cr
                                                            Constant NG/OG suction. Gastric distention will worsen ventilation.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Gastrointestinal

                                   Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication            None

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, using a pediatric circle. Forced-air warmer. Warm room to 75–80°. Maintain body
                                   temperature as close to 37° as possible. Use pressure-limited ventilation (PIP < 30 cmH2O). Continue NO if adminis-
                                   tered preop. Consider use of NICU ventilator, particularly if high RR (> 30/min) is required.

                                   Induction                Transported from NICU to OR by anesthesia team. If infant is already intubated, confirm
                                                            paralysis prior to transport to lessen the risk of patient movement and inadvertent extu-
                                                            bation. Transport with full monitoring (ECG, pulse oximetry, arterial pressure tracing).

===== PAGE 1311 =====
Repair of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia         1311

                    Induction          Have airway equipment available (Miller 1 laryngoscope blade, ET 3.0–3.5 with stylets, neo-
                       (cont’d)        natal mask). Resuscitation drugs (e.g., epinephrine 1 and 10 mcg/mL) should be drawn up.
                                       Prior to any further anesthetic administration, reestablish all monitoring in OR. For non-
                                       intubated patients, rapid-sequence induction (p. B-5) is appropriate. Atropine (0.02 mg/
                                       kg iv) given prior to induction to counteract bradycardia. If necessary to mask ventilate,
                                       avoid high inflation pressures, as this may further dilate the stomach. Place an OG tube
                                       prior to induction. Avoid N2O and maintain PIPs as low as possible. For patients with late
                                       herniations and healthy lungs, consider caudal epidural catheter advanced to thoracic space
                                       instead of iv opioids and early extubation (OR or NICU; see p. E-4). If surgery is performed
                                       on ECMO, give high-dose iv opioids (may be given in ECMO circuit) and muscle relaxant.

                    Maintenance        Opiate-based anesthetic (fentanyl 10–25 mcg/kg iv total), if no epidural in place, with iso-
                                       flurane supplementation. Ventilate with air/O2 to maintain O2 saturation 95–100%, as mea-
                                       sured by preductal ABGs/pulse oximetry. Avoid hypoxia, acidosis, hypothermia, which
                                       will ↑ pulmonary vasoconstriction. Keep CO2 slightly ↑ (permissive hypercapnia). Con-
                                       tinue neuromuscular blockade with rocuronium, or vecuronium. May need to momen-
                                       tarily pause surgery to restore adequate oxygenation and ventilation.

                    Emergence          Transport back to NICU with full monitoring, airway equipment, and drugs.

                    Blood and fluid    Blood loss minimal                     These infants are fluid-restricted in NICU. Con-
                       requirements    IV: 22–24 ga × 2                       tinue dextrose-containing solution from NICU. If
                                       NS/LR @ 4 mL/kg/h maintenance          umbilical venous line not present, dopamine may
                                                                              be infused via peripheral iv with dextrose solution
                                                                              serving as the carrier fluid. In emergency, NS/LR,
                                                                              albumin 5%, PRBCs (Hct < 50%) may be given via
                                                                              umbilical artery line.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. D-1)         Contralateral pneumothorax is detected using a
                                       Right-side precordial stethoscope      right axillary precordial stethoscope.
                                       Arterial line (umbilical or radial     ABG, Hct, glucose q 30–60 min.
                                       – 24 ga); if possible, right hand
                                       (preductal)
                                       ± Umbilical vein line
                                       Preductal and postductal pulse         Changes in pre- and postductal pulse oximetry
                                       oximetry                               rovide early warning of R→L shunt/pulmonary
                                                                              p
                                                                              HTN. (L hand postductal SaO2 will drop with R→L
                                                                              shunt.

                    Positioning        3 and pad pressure points
                                       3 eyes

                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                    Complications      Pneumothorax                           With acute deterioration in O2 sat, pneumotho-
                                       Hypoventilation                        rax on unaffected side is likely. Do not attempt to
                                       Hypothermia                            expand lungs vigorously. Hypoplasia, not atelecta-
                                       Metabolic acidosis                     sis, is the primary problem. Keep PIP <30 cmH2O,
                                       R → L shunting                         if possible.
                                       CHF

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications      Same as Intraoperative Complica-       Severely affected neonates will usually have been
                                       tions, above.                          stabilized on high-frequency jet ventilation or
                                                                              ECMO. The goal is to schedule semi-elective
                                                                              surgery when the neonate is medically stable. In
                                                                               case of acute deterioration in the OR, discuss with
                                                                               NICU criteria for initiation of HFJV or ECMO for
                                                                               infants whose oxygenation continues to worsen.

===== PAGE 1312 =====
1312   c h a p t e r 12.5      Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Complications                                                           Postoperatively, these neonates go through a “hon-
                                     (cont’d)                                                              eymoon period” of up to 24 h, after which they may
                                                                                                           develop ↑ pulmonary HTN and deteriorate clinically.

                                   Pain                        Fentanyl (0.5–2.0 mcg/kg/h iv),             Tachyphylaxis can develop in 24–48 h.
                                     management                Hydromorphone (0.010 mg/kg)
                                                               Epidural analgesia

                                   Tests                       CXR
                                                               ABG
                                                               Hct
                                                               Glucose
                                                               Electrolytes

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Arca MJ, Barnhart DC, Lelli JL Jr, et al: Early experience with minimally invasive repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernias:
                                        results and lessons learned. J Pediatr Surg 2003; 38(11):1563–8.
                                     2. Becmeur F, Reinberg O, Dimitriu C, et al: Thoracoscopic repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernia in children. Semin
                                        Pediatric Surgery 2007; 16(4):238–44.
                                     3. Bikhazi GB, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for neonates and premature infants. In: Motoyama EK, Davis PJ, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for
                                        Infants and Children, 6th edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2006, 545–50.
                                     4. Ellinas H, Seefelder C: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia repair in neonates: is thoracoscopy feasible? Pediatr Anesth 2010;
                                        20(10):967–9.
                                     5. Gregory GA, ed: Pediatric Anesthesia, 4th edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2002, 434–40.
                                     6. Hedrick HL: Management of prenatally diagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Pediatric Surgery 2013; 22(1):
                                        37–43.
                                     7. Holcomb GW III, Ostlie DJ, Miller KA: Laparoscopic patch repair of diaphragmatic hernias with surgisis. J Pediatr Surg 2005;
                                        40(8):E1–5.
                                     8. Liu LM, Pang LM: Neonatal surgical emergencies in anesthesiology. Clin North Am 2001; 19(2):268–72.
                                     9. Nguyen TL, Le AD: Thoracoscopic repair for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: lessons from 45 cases. J Pediatr Surg 2006;
                                        41(10):1713–5.
                                    10. Stayer SA, Liu Y: Pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Best Pract Res Clin Anesthesiol 2010; 24(3):375–86.
                                    11. Yang EY, Allmendinger N, Johnson SM, et al: Neonatal thoracoscopic repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: selection
                                        criteria for successful outcome. J Pediatr Surg 2005; 40(9):1369–75.

                                   Pyloromyotomy for Pyloric Stenosis
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Pyloric stenosis due to idiopathic hypertrophy of the muscular layers of the antrum and pylorus occurs
                                   in infants from 1 to 3 months of age, causing projectile vomiting with subsequent dehydration and metabolic alka-
                                   losis. Surgical division of the hypertrophied fibers—pyloromyotomy—is the treatment of choice. Preop hydration
                                   and electrolyte replacement are becoming less frequently needed, as early Dx by ultrasound becomes more common.
                                   Aspiration (of food or barium contrast) is avoided by NG suction.
                                   Surgical approach: The operation is performed through either a RUQ, periumbilical, or three laparoscopic inci-
                                   sions. The RUQ incision is now less utilized, whereas laparoscopic approach in experienced hands can be performed
                                   very quickly and effectively. With the open approach, the serosa and hypertrophic muscle of the pylorus are divided
                                   with a scalpel handle or Benson spreader. With the laparoscopic approach, a combination of sharp division of the
                                   muscular fibers followed by blunt retraction are used to perform the myotomy. The anesthesiologist is typically asked
                                   to instill 40–60 cc of saline or air by orogastric tube into the stomach so that leaks can be detected. Careful inspection
                                   for a mucosal tear will avoid a subsequent leak, the most common serious complication. Mucosal injury is treated by
                                   a simple repair or by closing the entire myotomy and creating a new one at an alternate site.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Pyloric stenosis; gastroenteritis; GERD

===== PAGE 1313 =====
Pyloromyotomy for Pyloric Stenosis   1313

                                Figure 12.5-7. Ramstedt pyloromyotomy for infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
                                The cross-sectional view shows herniation of the submucosa into the myotomy site,
                                indicative of an adequate myotomy. (Reproduced with permission from Sato TT,
                                Oldham KT: Pediatric abdomen. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT,
                                et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Transverse; RUQ; periumbilical, or three laparoscopic ports

                     Special                  Benson pyloric spreader; arthrotome (laparoscopy)
                       instrumentation

                     Intraop antibiotics      Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time            0.5–1 h

                     EBL                      < 5 mL/kg

                     Postop care              Cardiac/apnea monitoring

                     Mortality                0.3%

===== PAGE 1314 =====
1314   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Morbidity               Duodenal perforation
                                                            Incomplete myotomy with recurrent vomiting
                                                            Dehiscence
                                                            Hernia

                                    Pain score              4–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               1–12 wk

                                    Male:Female             4:1

                                    Incidence               3/1000 births

                                    Etiology                Unknown

                                    Associated              Has occurred following repair of other congenital anomalies, such as esophageal atresia,
                                      conditions            omphalocele.

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                        PREOPERATivE
                                   Patients with pyloric stenosis are usually term infants that present in the first month of life with dehydration 2°
                                   intractable vomiting. While in past these infants usually presented with moderate to severe dehydration, diagnosis
                                   by ultrasound has led to earlier intervention, thereby minimizing the degree of electrolyte imbalance. Correction of
                                   volume deficit and metabolic abnormalities is the first line of treatment. Surgery should proceed only after patients
                                   are medically stabilized, adequate urine output is ensured, and metabolic alkalosis is corrected. These procedures are
                                   usually done with laparoscopy.

                                   Cardiovascular            Mild-to-moderate dehydration is common and deficit should be replaced with NS
                                                             over ~12 h.
                                                             Tests: Urinary Cl > 20 mEq/L or plasma Cl > 100 mEq/L, when fluid volume restored.

                                   Metabolic                 Protracted vomiting → dehydration with hypochloremic hypokalemic metabolic alkalo-
                                                             sis. Up to 30% of infants may be hyperkalemic. ↓ K+ should be treated once alkalemia is
                                                             resolved and UO is confirmed.
                                                             Tests: ABGs; electrolytes; Ca++; glucose
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Gastrointestinal          Full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5). Prior to induction, it is necessary to pass an OG tube
                                                             several times to adequately decompress the stomach.

                                   Laboratory                Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication             None

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, forced-air warmer. Warm OR to 75–80° F. Maintain body temperature close to 37°C.

                                   Induction                 An iv catheter should be in place prior to induction for preop fluid management. Decom-
                                                             press stomach with NG or OG tube. Atropine (0.02 mg/kg iv, 0.1 mg minimum) com-
                                                             monly given before stomach decompression. Preoxygenate 2–3 min. Rapid-sequence
                                                             induction with cricoid pressure should be performed, using propofol (2–3 mg/kg) or

===== PAGE 1315 =====
Pyloromyotomy for Pyloric Stenosis            1315

                    Induction                  succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg iv) or rocuronium (1 mg/kg). Use awake laryngoscopy if dif-
                       (cont’d)                ficulty with intubation is anticipated. Intubate trachea with a appropriately sized tube, usu-
                                               ally 3.0-mm cuffed ETT, or 3.5-mm uncuffed ETT. Air leak should be between 20 and
                                               30 cm H2O pressure. If succinylcholine is used, further NMB with rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg)
                                               or vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg) will be necessary. Laparoscopic technique and insufflation may
                                               displace diaphragm and carina cephalad, leading to right mainstem intubation. Confirm
                                               BS after insufflation.

                    Maintenance                Volatile agent and air/O2 or N2O/O2. Avoid opioids to lessen risk of postop apnea due to
                                               tendency to hypoventilate due to previous metabolic alkalosis. Maintain muscle relax-
                                               ation. Surgeon should infiltrate wound site with bupivacaine 0.25% (with epinephrine
                                               1:200,000)—not to exceed 2.5 mg/kg (1 mL/kg), for postop pain relief. Rectal acetamino-
                                               phen 30 mg/kg can be administered.

                    Emergence                  Reverse NMB with appropriate agent (see p. D-3). Prior to extubation, suction stomach
                                               contents via NG/OG tube. Extubate when fully awake.

                    Blood and fluid            Minimal blood loss                          Minimal 3rd-space loss
                       requirements            IV: 22 ga × 1
                                               NS/LR @ (maintenance)

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                    Complications              Aspiration

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Apnea                                       Pulse oximetry/apnea monitor × 24 h. Previous
                                                                                           metabolic alkalosis decreases sensitivity to respira-
                                                                                           tory acidosis predisposing to hypoventilation and
                                                                                           apnea. This may be exacerbated by administration
                                                                                           of opioids. Differential diagnoses of apnea includes
                                                                                           hypoglycemia and hypothermia.
                                               Hypoglycemia (rare)                         Rx for hypoglycemia: dextrose 0.5 g/kg iv

                    Pain                       Acetaminophen (10–15 mg/kg po,              For child with severe dehydration and electrolyte
                      management               20 mg/kg pr q 6 h prn)                      abnormalities, ICU admission may be necessary.
                                               Avoid opioids

                                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                    Tests                      None routinely indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracic, urologic, and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PT, Cladis
                        FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Pub, Philadelphia: 2011, 750–51.
                     2. Liu LM, Pang LM: Neonatal surgical emergencies in anesthesiology. Clin North Am 2001; 19(2):265–8.
                     3. Schwartz D, Connelly NR, Manikantan P, et al: Hyperkalemia and pyloric stenosis. Anesth Analgesia 2003; 97:355–7.
                     4. Sun LS, Saraiya NR, Houck PJ: Anesthesia for abdominal surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric
                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 732–33.
                     5. Vegunta RK, Woodland JH, Rawlings AL, et al: Practice makes perfect: progressive improvement of laparoscopic
                        pyloromyotomy results, with experience. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2008; 18(1):152–6.

===== PAGE 1316 =====
1316   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Abdominal Tumor: Resection of Neuroblastoma,
                                   Wilms’ Tumor, Hepatic Tumors
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Pediatric abdominal tumors occur most commonly in children 1–4 yr old, may be massive, and usually arise
                                   from the sympathetic chain (including adrenal gland), kidney, or liver. Neuroblastoma and Wilms’ tumors are the most
                                   common; hepatic tumors (including hemangiomas) are less common but challenging. Because they originate in sympa-
                                   thetic tissue, many neuroblastomas produce catecholamines; however, these rarely have hemodynamic consequences.
                                   Surgical approach: At first operation, a central line is placed and very large neuroblastomas and hepatoblasto-
                                   mas are biopsied; definitive resection usually follows chemo- and/or radiation therapy. Small neuroblastomas, small
                                   hepatoblastomas, and even large Wilms’ tumors (without vascular extension or bilateral involvement) may be excised
                                   primarily. The principles of operation for these tumors are similar, beginning with a generous incision (transverse,
                                   midline, or thoracoabdominal), depending on tumor location and surgeon preference. The incision may be extended
                                   into the chest if control of the suprahepatic vena cava is necessary. Mobilization of the tumor from adjacent struc-
                                   tures may precede vascular control when the latter is difficult to obtain early, as is often the case. Tumors encasing
                                   vessels may be divided to preserve end-organ blood supply. Neuroblastomas tend to invade local structures. Wilms’
                                   tumors and hepatoblastomas tend to push aside adjacent structures. Wilms’ tumors are bilateral in 10–15% of cases
                                   and are prone to vascular extension into the renal vein, IVC, and (rarely) right atrium. Major hepatic resections are
                                   sometimes required for hemangiomas that cause CHF or thrombocytopenia (Kasabach-Merritt syndrome).
                                   Laparoscopic assistance is limited generally to biopsy of these lesions for tissue diagnosis. Some hepatoblastomas
                                   may be amenable to laparoscopic liver resection. Small, localized neuroblastomas and posterior mediastinal neural
                                   crest lesions are quite amenable to laparoscopic or thoracoscopic resection.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Neuroblastoma; Wilms’ tumor; hepatoblastoma

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Neuroblastoma                      Wilms’ Tumor                  Hepatic Resections

                                    Position                Supine, 15° lift                   ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Incision                Transverse, possible thoracic      ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            extension (Fig. 12.5-8)

                                    Special                 None                               Bypass instruments            CUSA; laser; argon beam
                                      instrumentation                                                                        coagulator

                                    Unique                  Rarely, hormonally active; may     Atrial tumor; ivC may be      Possible CHF; Plt trapping
                                      considerations        wrap blood vessels                 obstructed →↓ ↓ CO.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Antibiotics             Cefotaxime 25 mg/kg                ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Surgical time           3–6 h                              ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Closing                 None                               ⇐                             Hypoglycemia
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                     20–50 mL/kg                        ⇐                             20–100 mL/kg

                                    Postop care             PICU; epidural is ideal            ± PICU                        PICU

                                    Mortality               < 5%                               ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Intestinal obstruction: 10%        ⇐                             –
                                                            Postop respiratory atelectasis     ⇐                             ⇐
                                                                                                                             Hypoglycemia: 10%
                                                                                                                             Bile leak: 5–10%

                                    Pain score              7–8                                7–8                           7–8

===== PAGE 1317 =====
Abdominal Tumor: Resection of Neuroblastoma, Wilms’ Tumor, Hepatic Tumors           1317

                                Figure 12.5-8. Operative approach to resection of a right renal Wilms’ tumor. Insert
                                shows transverse incision. (Reproduced with permission from Laquaglia MP: Childhood
                                tumors. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific
                                Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                             Neuroblastoma                         Wilms’ Tumor                 Hepatic Resections

                     Age range               Few months—school age                 ⇐                            ⇐

                     Male:Female             1:1                                   ⇐                            ⇐

                     Incidence               1/10,000                              < 1/10,000                   ⇐

                     Etiology                Unknown                               ⇐                            ⇐

                     Associated                                                    Beckwith-Wiedemann;

                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                       conditions                                                  Neurofibromatosis; anirid-
                                                                                   ia 1%; hemihypertrophy
                                                                                   2%; GU abnormalities 5%

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   Neuroblastoma, Wilms’ tumor (nephroblastoma), and hepatic tumors commonly present as abdominal masses in
                   infants and children < 4 yr old. Symptoms and signs at presentation depend on size and location of the tumor and
                   any metastases. Neuroblastomas are usually associated with increased circulating and urinary catecholamines
                   (usually not clinically significant). Though hypertension is rare, tumor manipulation may result in sudden release
                   of catecholamines. Elevated catecholamines may be suspected if following Sx exist: flushing, diaphoresis, palpita-
                   tions, and hypertension.

                   The majority of patients with Wilm’s tumor have HTN due to increased renin activity and may be on antihypertensive
                   medications.

===== PAGE 1318 =====
1318   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Respiratory             There may be respiratory compromise (as a result of a large abdominal mass pushing up
                                                           on the diaphragm), which may worsen in the supine position. Wilms’ tumor commonly
                                                           metastasizes to the lungs.
                                                           Tests: CXR, if indicated from H&P

                                   Cardiovascular          ↑ BP is associated with Wilms’ tumor and rarely with neuroblastoma, and volume status should
                                                           be assessed carefully. Tumor bulk may impede venous return by occluding the IVC. Wilms’
                                                           tumor may extend through the IVC into the right atrium. These patients may have received
                                                           chemotherapy, for example adriamycin or doxorubicin, which is associated with cardiac toxicity
                                                           (most commonly at doses > 200 mg/m2). Cardiology consultation may be appropriate.
                                                           Tests: Echocardiogram

                                   Renal                   Wilms’ tumor may present with hematuria and other GU anomalies such as horseshoe kid-
                                                           ney, duplication of urinary tract, aplastic or hypoplastic kidneys. Renal function is usually
                                                           normal unless both kidneys are affected.
                                                           Tests: BUN; Cr

                                   Endocrine               Neuroblastomas are associated with ↑ catecholamine production. Preop adrenergic block-
                                                           ade (as would be required for a pheochromocytoma) is usually not necessary.
                                                           Tests: Urine VMA and HVA

                                   Gastrointestinal        Intestinal compression from tumor may ↑ risk of gastric aspiration. Persistent, watery diar-
                                                           rhea (→ hypovolemia, ↓ K+) is associated with neuroblastoma 2° VIP secretion.
                                                           Tests: Electrolytes

                                   Hematologic             Severe anemia and thrombocytopenia may be present. Blood should be available because
                                                           of possible massive intraop blood loss.
                                                           Tests: CBC; T&C. 3 availability of parental/directed donor blood, if requested. 3 PT, PTT.

                                   Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication           Patients > 9 mo may benefit from midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) 30 min before surgery.

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Combined epidural/GETA, warm OR to 75°–80°F; warm all iv fluids.

                                   Induction               IV catheter insertion before induction may be preferable. Access above the diaphragm,
                                                           such as an upper extremity or EJ site is preferred (due to possible tumor invasion of IVC
                                                           or need for IVC cross-clamping). A modified rapid-sequence induction is recommended
                                                           in those patients with a large intraabdominal mass compressing the GI tract. Otherwise,
                                                           standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1) is appropriate.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. D-2). Muscle relaxation is appropriate. HTN associated with
                                                           tumor manipulation can be treated with SNP (0.5–2.0 mcg/kg/min) or esmolol (50–150
                                                           mcg/kg/min).

                                   Emergence               In most instances, patient can be extubated at the end of surgery. Suction NG tube and
                                                           confirm air leak around ETT before extubation. If there is no air leak, consider laryngeal
                                                           edema and need for continued intubation.

                                   Blood and fluid         Potential for large blood loss/         Tumor resection may be associated with mas-
                                      requirements         moderate 3rd-space loss                sive blood loss, especially with IVC or renal vein
                                                            IV: 18–20 ga × 1–2                     involvement. Avoid placement of iv catheter in
                                                            NS/LR @ maintenance                    lower extremities.
                                                            5% albumin may be useful to
                                                            replace 3rd-space losses (8–10 mL/
                                                            kg/h). Transfuse to maintain Hct >
                                                            23. If > 1 mo of age, dextrose-con-
                                                            taining solutions are not required.

===== PAGE 1319 =====
Abdominal Tumor: Resection of Neuroblastoma, Wilms’ Tumor, Hepatic Tumors                           1319

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1).             ABG, Hct, blood glucose should be measured regu-
                                                Arterial line: 22 ga                        larly. CVP measurement may be useful to evaluate
                                                ± CVP line: (subclavian or IJ) con-         fluid status. Monitor UO and keep at 1 mL/kg/h.
                                                firm position by CXR

                    Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                3 eyes

                    Complications               Hypotension                                 ↓ BP 2° blood loss or following tumor removal due
                                                HTN                                         to decreased catecholamines.
                                                PE                                          ↑ BP 2° tumor or adrenal manipulation
                                                                                            2° tumor embolization usually from IVC →↓ BP.

                                                Hypothermia
                                                Hypoventilation                             Abdominal retractors and packing will interfere
                                                                                            with ventilation.

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications               Atelectasis
                                                Hypoventilation

                    Pain                        Epidural optimal                            See p. E-5 for dosing schedule.
                      management                Hydromorphone or morphine PCA
                                                (see p. E-5)
                                                Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg q 1–2)
                                                Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/
                                                kg q 1–2°)
                                                Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv q 6°
                                                or 20 mg/kg PR q 6°)

                    Tests                       Hct
                                                ABG
                                                CXR

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Hammer GH: Pediatric thoracic anesthesia. Anesth Analgesia 2001; 92:1449–964.
                     2. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthsia for general abdominal, thoracic, urologic, and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,

                                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Mosby., Philadelphia: 2011, 751–5.
                     3. Kako H, Taghon T, Veneziano G, et al: Severe intraoperative hypertension after induction of anesthesia in a child with a
                        neuroblastoma. J Anesth 2013; 27:464–67.
                     4. Lacreuse I, Valla JS, de Lagausie P, et al: Thoracoscopic resection of neurogenic tumors in children. J Pediatr Surg 2007;
                        42(10):1725–8.
                     5. Landsman IS, Ziegler LN, Deshpande JK: Anesthesia for pediatric urological procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB,
                        eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 748–50.
                     6. Leclair MD, de Lagausie P, Becmeur F, et al: Laparoscopic resection of abdominal neuroblastoma. Ann Surg Onco/ 2008;
                        15(1):117–24.
                     7. Mayhew JF: Intraoperative hyperthermia in a child with neuroblastoma. Ped Anesthesia 2006; 16:890–1.
                     8. Naaas MH, Cransberg K, van Grotel M, et al: Renin-induced hypertension in Wilm’s patients. Pediatric Blood Cancer 2007;
                        48(5):500–3.
                     9. Whyte SD, Ansermino JM: Anesthesia considerations in the management of Wilm’s tumor. Pediatric Anesth 2006; 16:
                        504–13.

===== PAGE 1320 =====
1320   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Laparotomy for Intestinal Perforation,
                                   Necrotizing Enterocolitis
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is an ischemic/inflammatory condition of the entire GI tract, most
                                   commonly affecting the terminal ileum, occurring in stressed, premature infants, often after feeding with formula. It
                                   may resolve with conservative management (npo, antibiotics, NG suction) or progress to necrosis and perforation,
                                   treated by resection and stoma formation or drainage procedure, according to patient weight and surgeon prefer-
                                   ence. Isolated ileal perforation—occurring without precedent pneumatosis intestinalis—may be a different disease
                                   entity; it is sometimes treated by primary repair. Infants with NEC may be septic, thrombocytopenic, and coagulo-
                                   pathic, with organ dysfunction related to prematurity, and have marginal ventilation. Despite expeditious surgery,
                                   several blood volumes may be lost, and hypothermia may develop. Unstable infants may have surgery performed in
                                   the NICU.
                                   Surgical approach: If not already present, central venous access is established at the time of surgery. A trans-
                                   verse laparotomy incision enables inspection of all intestines; dead bowel is resected, a proximal stoma is created
                                   in the healthy bowel, and a distal mucous fistula is created to protect potentially viable bowel. Less commonly,
                                   a Hartmann’s pouch is created (distal intestine remains inside without stoma). When proximal bowel is of interme-
                                   diate viability, a second-look operation is wise.
                                   Variant procedures or approaches: Placement of peritoneal drain. The procedure involves placement of a RLQ
                                   Penrose drain into the abdominal cavity as a bedside procedure. It is quick, relatively easy, and attended by little
                                   bleeding or hypothermia. Between 60 and 80% of drained children subsequently will require laparotomy.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Perforated NEC

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Resection                                      Drainage

                                    Position                Supine                                         ⇐

                                    Incision                Transverse                                     RLQ

                                    Special                 None                                           Penrose drains
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Temperature support                            ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             Ampicillin 50 mg/kg + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg +   ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            clindamycin 10 mg/kg iv preop

                                    Surgical time           1–2.5 h                                        0.5 h

                                    EBL                     10–100 mL/kg                                   1–2 mL/kg

                                    Postop care             NICU                                           ⇐

                                    Mortality               20–25%                                         16–20%

                                    Morbidity               Respiratory failure                            ⇐
                                                            Sepsis
                                                            Stricture
                                                            Intracranial hemorrhage

                                    Pain score              6–7                                            3–4

===== PAGE 1321 =====
Laparotomy for Intestinal Perforation, Necrotizing Enterocolitis            1321

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–weeks

                     Male:Female             > 1:1

                     Incidence               5–8% NICU admissions

                     Etiology                Multifactorial, including intestinal ischemia; bacterial colonization; perinatal stress; immaturity;
                                             hypoxia; hyperosmolar feeding; splanchnic ischemia

                     Associated              Prematurity (80–90%); respiratory distress; PDA
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   Most (80–90%) of these patients are premature infants (< 36 wk gestational age) presenting with sepsis. Severity
                   of symptoms, complications, and mortality are inversely related to gestational age. Respiratory distress syndrome
                   (RDS) is often present 2° prematurity of the lungs, and pulmonary insufficiency is likely present. In addition to sepsis,
                   significant 3rd-space losses contribute to hypovolemia and metabolic acidosis. If the patient is extremely unstable,
                   consider peritoneal drainage or surgical intervention at the bedside in the NICU.

                    Respiratory              Premature infants are at risk for RDS. These infants are usually on mechanical ventilation
                                             with ↑ FiO2 prior to surgery. They also are at ↑ risk for hypoventilation, hypercapnea, and
                                             hypoxemia. Enlarged abdomen may compromise respiratory function. 3 ventilator set-
                                             tings and recent ABG in preparation for OR mechanical ventilation. Consider need for
                                             NICU ventilator in OR.
                                             Tests: CXR; ABG

                    Cardiovascular           Likely hemodynamic instability 2° to sepsis and/or underresuscitation. Inotropes. (e.g.,
                                             dopamine 5–10 mcg/kg/min) may be required to maintain adequate CO. Associated car-
                                             diac anomalies (e.g., VSD, PDA) can lead to CHF, further complicating fluid management.
                                             Pulmonary overcirculation and intrinsic pulmonary disease contribute to pulmonary HTN.
                                             Tests: CXR; ABG; ECHO

                    Neurological             Intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) may be 2° to prematurity or birth asphyxia. These hem-
                                             orrhagic regions have impaired autoregulation, and wide variations in BP (20–30 mm Hg)
                                             can aggravate ischemia/hemorrhage. In addition, these patients may have a seizure disorder.
                                             Tests: Head ultrasound, if indicated from H&P

                    Renal                    Presence of PDA and previous Rx with NSAID can lead to impaired renal perfusion and

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                                             clearance. Aggravating factors are aminoglycoside antibiotics, sepsis, and CHF.
                                             Tests: BUN; Cr

                    Metabolic                Metabolic acidosis 2° to sepsis and/or CHF will further worsen myocardial function. Neo-
                                             nate has minimal glycogen stores and are more prone to hypoglycemia.
                                             Tests: ABG; Ca++; glucose; electrolytes

                    Hematologic              DIC, and associated thrombocytopenia, anemia may be present.
                                             Tests: CBC, PT, PTT, fibrinogen, availability of irradiated, washed RBCs or freshest pRBC.

                    Laboratory               Others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            None

                        INTRAOPERATivE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, using a pediatric circle. Warm OR to 75°–80°F. Forced-air warmer and warming pad
                   on OR table. Use air/O2 mixture for ventilation and maintain SpO2 between 92–94% (PaO2 < 70 mm Hg) to minimize

===== PAGE 1322 =====
1322   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   risk of retinopathy. Avoid high concentrations of O2 if possible. Consider use of NICU ventilator if patient requires ↑
                                   RR or ↑ PIPs. Epidural catheter insertion is not recommended in the presence of sepsis.

                                   Induction                 These patients usually are intubated. If not, intubate with full-stomach precautions (see
                                                             p. B-5). Suction stomach. Give atropine 0.02 mg/kg iv (0.1 mg minimum dose) before
                                                             laryngoscopy. Preoxygenate for 3 min Miller 0/1 blade. Apply cricoid pressure until airway
                                                             secured. ETT should have leak at 18–35 cmH2O pressure.

                                   Maintenance               Low-dose volatile agent supplemented with fentanyl, titrated for hemodynamic stability
                                                             (10–30 mcg/kg). Avoid N2O. Muscle relaxation required. Inotropes (dopamine 3–5 mcg/
                                                             kg/min and epi 0.05–0.2 mcg/kg/min) may be needed to maintain hemodynamic stability
                                                             and perfusion.
                                                             Neonates may be under-resuscitated upon arrival from NICU. 3rd-space losses are usually
                                                             significant. Treat hypotension with volume before increasing pressor support. Maintain
                                                             Hct >35%. Albumin 5% (10 mL/kg iv). PRBC 10 mL/kg, FFP Plt 10 mL/kg.

                                   Emergence                 Postop ventilation generally required. Transport to NICU with full monitoring (pulse
                                                             oximetry, ECG, arterial line). Have laryngoscope and appropriately sized mask and ETT
                                                             available. Extra volume (albumin 5% in 20 mL syringes) may be needed during transport.

                                   Blood and fluid           Anticipate moderate-to-large blood      Neonates may be under-resuscitated upon arrival from
                                      requirements           and fluid losses.                       NICU. 3rd-space losses are usually significant. Rx: ↑
                                                             IV: 22–24 ga × 2 (or 1 + CVP)           BP with volume before increasing dopamine. Main-
                                                                                                     tain Hct > 35%. Albumin 5% (10 mL/kg iv) boluses
                                                                                                     as needed. Crystalloid/colloid > 100 mL/kg total not
                                                                                                     uncommon. Hct, glucose, Ca++, ABG, Plt count, PT/
                                                                                                     PTT, electrolytes q 30–60 min. I-stat if available. Check
                                                                                                     ionized serum Ca++ frequently (q30 while transfusing).
                                                                                                     Citrate is present in blood and blood products, espe-
                                                                                                     cially FFP, and binds serum Ca++. Neonatal liver has
                                                                                                     limited ability to clear citrate, and neonatal heart is
                                                                                                     especially dependent on ionized Ca++.
                                                             Continue dextrose-containing solu‑      Because of the potentially large blood loss/kg,
                                                             tion from NICU to avoid hypo‑           ensure that blood replacement is available in the
                                                             glycemia.                               room and that additional factor replacement is
                                                             Warm fluids.                            available on call.

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1)
                                                             A-line pref. preductal (RUE)
                                                             ± CVP line                              CVP line is not as important as arterial line for
                                                                                                     intraop care, but may be useful for administering
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                                     inotropic drugs.

                                   Positioning               3 eyes
                                                             3 pad pressure points

                                   Complications             Hypothermia
                                                             Metabolic acidosis                      Aggressive volume replacement and maintaining
                                                             Hypovolemia                             normothermia will prevent or ameliorate metabolic
                                                                                                     acidosis. Bicarbonate replacement = base deficit ×
                                                                                                     wt (kg) × 0.3.
                                                             Hyperkalemia 2° blood products          Minimized by requesting that newest blood avail-
                                                                                                     able be sent up. If irradiated, it may need to be
                                                                                                     washed. (check w/ blood bank for policy).
                                                             Pneumothorax                            ↓ O2 sats, ↑ PIPs. 3 for mucus plugging or main-
                                                                                                     stem intubation.
                                                             Hypocalcemia                            Frequent blood sampling is necessary. Rx: CaCl2
                                                                                                     (10 mg/kg iv) in dilute solution via CVP line or Ca
                                                                                                     gluconate (30 mg/kg iv) via peripheral line.
                                                             Hypoglycemia                            Continue 10% dextrose infusion from NICU.

===== PAGE 1323 =====
Repair of Biliary Atresia and Choledochal Cysts             1323

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Hypovolemia due to blood loss, and 3rd-spacing
                                               Metabolic acidosis
                                               Sepsis
                                               Pulmonary edema
                                               Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)

                    Pain                       Morphine (0.05–0.10 mg/kg iv) q 1–2 h prn or via continuous infusion for initial 24–48 h
                      management

                    Tests                      CBC
                                               Electrolytes, Ca++, Glucose
                                               ABG
                                               CXR, if central line placed.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Brett C, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general surgery in the neonate. In: Davis PT, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthsia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Pub, Philadelphia: 2011, 579–84.
                     2. Gregory GA: Anesthesia for premature infants. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th
                        edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 480–96.
                     3. Liu LM, Pang LM: Neonatal surgical emergencies in anesthesiology. Clin North Am 2001; 19(2):277–9.

                   Repair of Biliary Atresia and Choledochal
                   Cysts
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: “Biliary atresia” is a misnomer because the pathology seems to be an ascending progressive fibrosis
                   of the biliary tree ultimately manifested by intrahepatic bridging fibrosis and cirrhosis. The obstruction develops
                   postnatally, typically in an otherwise healthy 4- to 6-wk-old girl, though it may be confused with neonatal hepatitis
                   or with the cholestasis seen in sick neonates fed intravenously. Preop studies often are not diagnostic. There is some
                   time pressure for diagnosis and surgery because several studies have shown worse outcomes if the procedure is de-
                   layed beyond 8–10 wk of age. Even if the Kasai is not successful long term, it can be an important bridge that allows

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                   infants to grow, making subsequent liver transplantation outcomes more successful. Todani classified choledochal
                   cysts into five types. The first type is the most common: a fusiform ballooning of the extrahepatic bile ducts often
                   involving the gallbladder. Cysts are prone to bile stasis, obstruction, and malignant conversion in adulthood. Some
                   are detected when they become symptomatic, whereas others are detected on antenatal ultrasound.
                   Surgical approach: Following preop administration of vitamin K, operation for biliary atresia begins through a
                   transverse RUQ incision (or laparoscopically) for liver biopsy and operative cholangiography. Ascent of contrast
                   into the liver and descent into the duodenum occurs in up to 20% of cases, which excludes biliary atresia and will
                   terminate the operation. Failure to establish patency of the biliary tree is indication to extend the incision to excise
                   the gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary tree. In doing so, the portal vein and hepatic artery are skeletonized up to the
                   base of the liver (called the portal or hepatic “plate”; Fig. 12.5-9). This region is excised (attended by some bleeding) in
                   the hope that bile will drain from the liver above into a Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum, which is sewn to the undersurface
                   of the liver (portoenterostomy or Kasai procedure). There is currently little support for early liver transplantation.
                   Choledochal cyst resection involves a smaller incision, possible cholangiogram, and dissection similar to the Kasai
                   procedure, but only to a level above the cyst (frequently, the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts). Liver biopsy is not
                   always required, and cirrhosis is uncommon. Bleeding may result when an inflamed cyst is adherent to the portal
                   vein or hepatic artery. The distal end of the cyst is ligated, the body of it excised, and the proximal bile duct (usually

===== PAGE 1324 =====
1324   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                     A                                                       B

                                      C

                                            Figure 12.5-9. The essential features of the portoenterostomy for biliary atresia
                                            include appropriate mobilization (A) and transection (B) of the fibrous biliary tract
        Pediatric Surgery

                                            remnant. C: Creation of a Roux-en-Y jejunal conduit with biliary enteric anastomosis
                                            completes the procedure. (Reproduced with permission from Sato TT, Oldham
                                            KT: Pediatric abdomen. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds.
                                            Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                            Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                   the common hepatic duct) sewn to a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum. Kasai can be performed laparoscopically with or
                                   without robotic assistance. However, concerns have been raised about the effectiveness of biliary drainage when
                                   performed laparoscopically.
                                   Variant procedures: Infant ERCP has recently been reported as an alternative to intraop cholangiogram for the
                                   definitive diagnosis of biliary atresia.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Biliary atresia; choledochal cyst; obstructive jaundice

===== PAGE 1325 =====
Repair of Biliary Atresia and Choledochal Cysts        1325

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Upper transverse-chevron; right transverse for cholangiogram

                     Special                Cholangiography equipment
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Cholangiogram, if gallbladder patent
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg iv
                                            Intraop: cephalosporin irrigation (1 g/500 mL NS)

                     Surgical time          4–6 h (1–2 h if cholangiography/biopsy only)

                     EBL                    5–10 mL/kg

                     Postop care            PICU

                     Mortality              < 5%

                     Morbidity              Bile leak: 10–15%
                                            Obstruction: 10%
                                            Sepsis: 5–10%
                                            Respiratory failure: 5%

                     Pain score             7–8 (4–5 for cholangiogram)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              6–12 wk

                     Male:Female            > 1:1

                     Incidence              1/15,000 births

                     Etiology               Viral; autoimmune

                     Associated             NB: Asplenia syndrome (5–10%); polysplenia (5–10%)
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                   Biliary atresia is a postnatal inflammatory disorder of the hepatobiliary tree resulting in fibrosis, cirrhosis, and ob-
                   structive jaundice. The Kasai procedure is indicated if the diagnosis of biliary atresia is made in the first 2–3 mo of
                   life. If the Kasai procedure is unsuccessful, the patient may require a liver transplant.

                    Gastrointestinal         Hepatic function preserved initially (i.e., normal albumin synthesis). Cholestatic jaundice
                                             usually present. There may be impaired elimination of drugs, particularly NMBs. Glucose
                                             homeostasis is usually normal.

                    Hematologic              Anemia 2° chronic disease. Impaired vitamin K absorption 2° lack of bile salts. Elevated PT
                                             will variably correct with vitamin K administration (phytonadione 1 mg im/iv given during
                                             the week before surgery). Have FFP available if PT not corrected after vitamin K.
                                             Tests: PT; PTT; CBC; T&C

                    Laboratory               Electrolytes: BUN, Cr, LFTs, albumin, bilirubin, direct and indirect, glucose, others as indi-
                                             cated from H&P. Confirm availability of blood products (PRBCs, FFP).

                    Premedication            None

===== PAGE 1326 =====
1326   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA/caudal. Warm OR to 75°–80°F; use forced-air warmer, warming pad on OR table.
                                   (Remember, majority of heat loss is radiant.)

                                   Induction                   Mask induction is appropriate if no iv in place. NMB (e.g., rocuronium 0.6–1 mg/kg or
                                                               cisatracurium 0.1–0.2 mg/kg) to facilitate tracheal intubation, using appropriately sized
                                                               ETT (usually 3.0–3.5 cuffed ETT; with leak at 18–35 cmH2O). If coagulation factors are
                                                               normal, consider caudal catheter, and advance to thoracic position. Preservative free NS
                                                               may be used to dilate the epidural space. Position may be confirmed with ultrasound.

                                   Maintenance                 Sevoflurane or isoflurane/air/O2; no N2O, to avoid bowel distention. Continue muscle
                                                               relaxant to facilitate abdominal closure.

                                   Emergence                   Patient usually extubated in OR and transported to PACU or, in the case of prolonged sur-
                                                               gery and/or significant blood loss, to PICU.

                                   Blood and fluid             Moderate blood loss                        Potential for large 3rd-space losses. Plan 10 mL/
                                      requirements             IV: 22 ga × 1–2                            kg/h of NS/LR for replacement, and be prepared
                                                               NS/LR @ 10 mL/kg/h                         for sudden blood loss. Use albumin 5%, or NS/LR to
                                                               Albumin 5%                                 replace blood loss.

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1)             Hct, blood glucose, ±ABG pm. Maintain UO @ 1
                                                               Urinary catheter                           mL/kg/h. The presence of ↑ ↑ BP variations with
                                                               NG tube                                    respiration is a useful indicator of hypovolemia.
                                                               ± Arterial line (22–24 ga)

                                   Positioning                 3 padding – heels, elbows, occiput
                                                               3 eyes

                                   Complications               Hypothermia                                In upper abdominal surgery, the retractors and
                                                               Hypovolemia                                abdominal packing may limit diaphragmatic excur-
                                                               Hypoventilation                            sion, thus requiring higher PIP to adequately venti-
                                                               Metabolic acidosis                         late the patient. Need ETT leak (PIP) > 20 cmH2O
                                                                                                          to ensure ability to adequately ventilate. ETT posi-
                                                                                                          tion may also change with packing, resulting in R
                                                                                                          mainstem intubation, requiring repositioning.

                                        POSTOPERATivE
                                    Complications              Hypovolemia                                3rd-space losses continue in the immediate postop
                                                               Atelectasis                                period.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                               Cholangitis

                                    Pain                       Fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg iv q 1 h prn           Caudal analgesia if catheter in place (see p. E-5).
                                      management               MSO(subset 4) (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv           Bupivacaine dose should be limited to 0.25 mg/kg
                                                               q 2–4 h prn)                               2° decreased hepatic clearance and serum protein-
                                                               Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg            binding capacity.
                                                               q 1 iv)

                                    Tests                      Hct
                                                               ABG

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Dutta S, Woo RK, Albanese CT: Minimal access portoenterostomy: advantages and disadvantages of standard laparoscopic
                                        and robotic techniques. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2007; 17(2):258–64.
                                     2. Green DW, Howard ER, Davenport M: Anesthesia, perioperative management and outcome of correction of extrahepatic
                                        biliary atresia in the infant: a review of 50 cases in the King’s College Hospital Series. Pediatr Anesth 2000; 10(6):581–9.

===== PAGE 1327 =====
Repair of Abdominal Wall Defects: Omphalocele/Gastroschisis                    1327

                     3. Le D, Woo RK, Sylvester KG, et al: Laparoscopic resection of type 1 choledochal cysts in pediatric patients. Surg Endosc 2006;
                        20(2):249–51.
                     4. Meunier JF, Goujard E, Dubousset AM, et al: Pharmakokinetics of bupivacaine after continuous epidural infusion in infants
                        with and without biliary atresia. Anesthesiology 2001; 95(1):87–95.
                     5. Shteyer E, Wengrower D, Benuri-Silbiger I, et al: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography in neonatal choleotasis.
                        J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2012; 55(2):142–45.
                     6. Woo RK, Le D, Albanese CT, et al: Robot-assisted laparoscopic resection of a type I choledochal cyst in a child. J Laparoendosc
                        Adv Surg Tech A 2006; 16(2):179–83.

                   Repair of Abdominal Wall Defects:
                   Omphalocele/Gastroschisis

                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Omphalocele is a herniation of bowel and sometimes viscera into an enlarged umbilical cord that may
                   be categorized as small (< 2 cm, sometimes called a “hernia of the cord”); medium (2–5 cm defect); or giant (≥ 6 cm
                   and containing liver). The larger the defect, the more difficult the repair for lack of skin and muscle; primary repair
                   is virtually never possible for giant defects. Omphaloceles are associated with genetic defects (trisomy 21) and may
                   be part of other syndromes (e.g., OEIS, pentalogy of Cantrell, which includes cardiac defects). The surprisingly tough
                   membrane of the umbilical cord protects the intestines from exposure to amniotic fluid. Gastroschisis is not associ-
                   ated with chromosomal anomalies or syndromes. It involves a 1–2 cm defect to the right of the umbilicus, through
                   which bowel, and sometimes stomach or gonads, extrude and are exposed to the sclerosing effects of amniotic fluid,
                   causing variable degrees of “peel” (bowel-wall thickening).
                   Surgical approach: Central venous catheter placement precedes or accompanies the initial operation for gas-
                   troschisis as postoperative parenteral nutrition is required in almost all cases. Enlargement of the defect is
                   sometimes necessary to permit visceral reduction, provided there is sufficient space in the abdominal cavity.
                   If not, reduction will cause bowel ischemia and respiratory compromise. Some surgeons will use a maximal
                   transduced bladder or stomach pressure (20 mm Hg) or maximal PIP (35 mm Hg) as an indicator that primary
                   repair may potentially lead to abdominal compartment syndrome. In this case, a prosthetic abdominal wall of
                   Silastic is created or a preformed device is placed, creating a “silo.” In the NICU the silo is gradually reduced in
                   size over 3–10 d, whereupon the abdomen is closed primarily (Fig. 12.5-10). Small and medium-size omphalo-
                   celes are treated similarly. Return of intestinal function will typically take 3–7 d for omphaloceles and 1–4 wk
                   for gastroschisis.
                   Variant procedures or approaches: Sutureless approaches to both gastroschisis and omphalocele are emerg-

                                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                   ing and can be effective means of closing these defects with outstanding cosmetic results. For giant omphalocele,
                   sclerosing solutions (silver sulfasalazine, tincture of mercurochrome) are applied to cause epithelialization. The
                   omphalocele is thus effectively converted into a ventral hernia. Months to years later the ventral hernia can be
                   closed without undue respiratory or bowel compromise. Alternatively compression wraps applied around the
                   abdomen work to reduce bowel content over a period of months. The remaining fascial defect decreases in size
                   until it resembles an umbilical hernia, which may close spontaneously or require later minor surgical closure.
                   With gastroschisis, sutured closure of the fascial defect is unnecessary. In cases where the bowel can be primarily
                   reduced, the remnant umbilical cord is used as a biological dressing over the defect, and a large plastic dressing is
                   applied (e.g., Tegaderm). The defect closes spontaneously over the ensuing weeks, and reepithelialization occurs,
                   as bowel function returns. For irreducible bowel, a silo is applied and sequential reduction is performed. After the
                   bowel is reduced completely, a plastic dressing with absorbant nonstick gauze is applied, and spontaneous closure
                   ensues. Cosmetic results are typically superior to suture closure, and there is never a concern for high ventilatory
                   pressures.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Omphalocele; gastroschisis; pentalogy of Cantrell

===== PAGE 1328 =====
1328   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                                     Omphalocele

                                        A                                       B                                        C

                                       Gastroschisis

                                                                               Silo

                                                 D                                  E                                F

                                               Figure 12.5-10. Management of gastroschisis and omphalocele (both shown
        Pediatric Surgery

                                               together): A: Gastroschisis defect. B: Extension of opening with midline incision
                                               (optional). C: Use of silo if primary closure is not possible. D: Finished silo. E, F:
                                               Staged ligation of silo with reduction of silo contents into abdominal cavity proper.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Oldham KT, Colombani PM, Foglia RP: Surgery of
                                               Infants and Children. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine

                                    Incision                 Midline

                                    Special                  None; for staged repair, reinforced Silastic sheeting or premade (Bentec) silo
                                      instrumentation

===== PAGE 1329 =====
Repair of Abdominal Wall Defects: Omphalocele/Gastroschisis           1329

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics           Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time         2h

                     Closing               Assess respiratory and cardiovascular function after muscle closure by PIP, ABG, MAP. Impaired
                       considerations      ventilation and venous return will result from overaggressive attempts at closure.

                     EBL                   5–10 mL/kg

                     Postop care           Assisted ventilation; volume resuscitation as needed (gastroschisis)

                     Mortality             Omphalocele: 28%
                                           Gastroschisis: 15–23%

                     Morbidity             Respiratory failure
                                           Intestinal ischemia/obstruction
                                           Infection

                     Pain score            5–6 (primary); 4–5 (staged repair)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Newborn

                     Male:Female           1:1

                     Incidence             1/3000–1/10,000 live births

                     Etiology              Unknown

                     Associated            Gastroschisis: malrotation, intestinal atresia—usually not associated with chromosomal abnor-
                       conditions          malities or syndromes.
                                           Omphalocele: cardiac, renal anomalies
                                           Trisomy 13, 18, 21
                                           Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (hypoglycemia, macroglossia)
                                           Pentalogy of Cantrell: omphalocele, sternal, diaphragmatic, pericardial, cardiac anomalies
                                           Exstrophy cloaca: omphalocele, exstrophy bladder, imperforate anus

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE

                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                   Newborns with omphalocele/gastroschisis may present for urgent surgery. The large exposed surface area of abdomi-
                   nal contents allows substantial evaporative heat and fluid losses. Omphalocele is associated with other congenital
                   anomalies (e.g., VSD, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome [infantile gigantism, macroglossia, hypoglycemia]; see above
                   list). The majority of these patients should be medically stabilized in the nursery before coming to the OR.

                    Respiratory             If premature (< 36-wk gestational age), infant is at ↑ risk for RDS and respiratory
                                            insufficiency.
                                            Tests: CXR; ABG

                    Cardiovascular          With omphalocele, there is a 20% incidence of cardiac anomalies (VSD, PDA).
                                            Tests: ECHO for omphalocele, or if murmur is found.

                    Gastrointestinal        Intestinal atresia may be present. Hypovolemia from evaporative loss and underresuscita-
                                            tion likely; check for evidence of dehydration, urine output, ABG. Full-stomach precau-
                                            tions (see p. B-5).

===== PAGE 1330 =====
1330   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Endocrine               Beckwith-Wiedemann associated with hypoglycemia (term infant glucose should be
                                                           > 36 mg/dL).
                                                           Tests: Glucose; electrolytes

                                   Laboratory              CBC; T&C; PT; PTT; UA; ABG

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, warm OR to 75°–80°F; forced-air warmer, warming pad on OR table. (Remember,
                                   majority of heat loss is radiant.)

                                   Induction               Atropine (0.02 mg/kg iv, minimum dose, 0.1 mg) is given before induction to ablate vagal
                                                           response to laryngoscopy. Pass an OG tube to decompress stomach. Ensure adequate
                                                           intravascular volume status (capillary refill < 2 sec; warm, pink extremities). Preoxygenate
                                                           with 100% O2 for 2–3 min. prior to rapid-sequence intubation. Propofol (2–3 mg/kg) and
                                                           rocuronium (1 mg/kg) or succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg) iv administered to facilitate tra-
                                                           cheal intubation. Use appropriately sized ETT to keep air leak at 18–35 cmH2O. Lower
                                                           pressure air leak may make ventilation difficult if primary closure of abdomen is accom-
                                                           panied by significant rise in intraabdominal pressure. For small defects, place an epidural
                                                           catheter inserted via the caudal after intubation. If positioning for the epidural catheter
                                                           insertion is difficult, do not proceed; use iv fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone for pain
                                                           management.

                                   Maintenance             Avoid high FiO2. Use air/O2 mixture for ventilation to maintain O2 sat 95–100% and PaO2
                                                           < 100. If no epidural is placed, then use a primarily narcotic-based technique with fen-
                                                           tanyl (10–25 mcg/kg iv total), low-dose sevoflurane as needed. Note initial PIP prior to
                                                           abdominal closure. Maintain neuromuscular blockade to facilitate abdominal closure. If an
                                                           epidural catheter is available, dose with local anesthetic and opiate (see p. D-5) to supple-
                                                           ment inhalation/iv agent.

                                   Emergence               Remain intubated postop unless defect is very small. An epidural catheter may also be
                                                           placed at the end of procedure if defect is small and early extubation is planned. Transport
                                                           to NICU on 100% O2.

                                   Blood and fluid         Marked 3rd-space fluid loss            Continue dextrose-containing solution from NICU.
                                      requirements         Minimal–moderate blood loss            Replace 3rd-space losses (10– 15+ mL/kg/h).
                                                           IV: 22–24 ga × 1–2, upper              Replace blood loss with albumin 5% and/or blood
                                                           extremities                            mL for mL. Maintain Hct > 30%. Lower extremities
                                                           NS/LR @ 4 mL/kg/h                      usually edematous due to abdominal venous and
                                                                                                  lymphatic compression.
                                                           Standard monitors (see p. D-1)         ABG pre- and postabdominal closure. Hct, glucose,
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Monitoring
                                                           Arterial line (24-ga radial)           electrolytes q 60 min. CVP; reserve 1 lumen for
                                                                                                  postop TPN.
                                                           ± CVP/Broviac planned                  Respiratory variation on arterial waveform is sensi-
                                                           Urinary catheter                       tive indicator of hypovolemia.

                                   Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                           3 eyes

                                   Complications           Hypothermia                            If intragastric pressure is > 20 mm Hg and CVP
                                                           Hypovolemia                            increases by 4 mm Hg with initial primary closure,
                                                           Respiratory insufficiency/             it should be converted to a staged repair. Raised
                                                           hypoventilation                        abdominal pressure will cause an acute restrictive
                                                           Atelectasis                            ventilatory defect and promote abdominal visceral
                                                           Volume overload/pulmonary              ischemia.
                                                           edema
                                                           Abdominal compartment
                                                           syndrome

===== PAGE 1331 =====
Pull-Through for Hirschsprung’s Disease             1331

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Bowel ischemia/necrosis                     Respiratory insufficiency due to raised abdominal
                                               Peritonitis                                 pressure; may require release of repair and convert-
                                               Sepsis/metabolic acidosis                   ing to a staged repair.
                                               Pneumothorax

                    Pain                       Continuous epidural or iv opioid
                      management               infusion per NICU (see p. E-5)

                    Tests                      ABG                                         UO maintained at > 0.5 mL/kg/h
                                               Hct
                                               Glucose
                                               Electrolytes, Ca++

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Brett C, Davis PJ: Anesthsia for general surgery in the neonate. In: Davis PT, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier Pub, Philadelphia: 2011, 564–7.
                     2. Lee SL, Beyer TD, Kim SS, et al: Initial nonoperative management and delayed closure for treatment of giant omphaloceles.
                        J Pediatr Surg 2006; 41(11):1846–9.
                     3. Liu LM, Pang LM: Neonatal surgical emergencies in anesthesiology. Clin North Am 2001; 19(2):276–7.
                     4. Mhamane R, Dave N, Garasia M: Delayed primary repair of giant pmphalocele: anesthesia challenges. Pediatr Anesth 2012;
                        22(9):935–6.
                     5. Morton NS, Fairgrieve R, Moores A, et al: Anesthsia for the full-term and ex-premature infants. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos
                        DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthsia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 503–6.
                     6. Motoyama EK, Davis PJ, eds: Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 7th edition. Mosby-Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2006,
                        542–5.
                     7. Sandler A, Lawrence J, Meehan J, et al: A “plastic” sutureless abdominal wall closure in gastroschisis. J Pediatr Surg 2004;
                        39(5):738–41.

                   Pull-Through for Hirschsprung’s Disease
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Congenital aganglionosis, called Hirschsprung’s disease (HD), begins at the dentate line of the anus and
                   extends proximally for a variable distance. It produces functional obstruction because the involved bowel is tonically con-
                   tracted. The “transition zone” to ganglionic bowel occurs in the distal colon in 80% of cases; in 10%, it occurs in the small
                   bowel. Sx range from mild-to-severe constipation, sometimes complicated by toxic enterocolitis. When severe, it may

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                   be life-threatening and mandates a rapid loop colostomy. Three classical operations (Swenson, Soave, Duhamel) and
                   a newer perineal one-stage pull-through (POOP) were developed to remove or bypass the affected bowel (Fig. 12.5-11).
                   Today, classic three-stage operations are being reduced to one or two stages, often assisted by laparoscopy.
                   Surgical approach: Initial diagnosis is with contrast enema, followed by a transanal rectal biopsy to demonstrate
                   absence of ganglion cells. Standard surgical approach in a neonatally diagnosed Hirschsprung’s disease is now a one-
                   stage neonatal repair, using a Soave or Swenson procedure, which avoids a colostomy and may be performed via a
                   circumanal incision. Laparoscopy or umbilical incision is used to biopsy the colon to determine the transition zone.
                   Once ganglionated bowel is identified on frozen section, it is pulled down to the anus by the transanal approach.
                   A more traditional approach is to biopsy through a LLQ incision initially, bringing out a loop (“leveling”) colostomy
                   above the transition zone, identified using frozen sections. Subsequent definitive repair is performed when the child
                   is larger in one stage (or two if a protective proximal stoma needs subsequent closure). Positioning depends on the
                   approach chosen; some surgeons prefer a lower body antibacterial preparation, others position the child in lithotomy
                   position and prepare the abdomen and perineum. Positioning neonates transversely across an operating table rotated
                   90° affords good surgical access to the perineum and anesthesia access to the head. Significant bleeding is infrequent;
                   operative time often is determined by the delay for frozen sections, which are challenging for most pediatric patholo-
                   gists. Where skilled pediatric pathologists are unavailable, some surgeons will perform a RUQ transverse colostomy

===== PAGE 1332 =====
1332

                                       A                                                    B

                                         C

                                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                E

                                                            D

                                         G

                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                          J

                                                           H
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Figure 12.5-11. Laparoscopically assisted pull-through for Hirschsprung’s disease. A: Sites for operative
                                   trocar placement. B: Division of colon and rectal mesentery with mobilization of proximal colon.
                                   C: Circumferential incision in rectal mucosa 5–10 mm cephalad to the pectinate line. D: Mucosal traction
                                   sutures to facilitate further dissection from rectal muscular cuff. E: Transanal submucosal dissection is
                                   continued cephalad to meet the caudal extent of the transperitoneal rectal dissection. F: Circumferential
                                   incisions of rectal muscular cuff. G: Rectal muscular cuff is split posteriorly to accommodate the pull-through
                                   segment (segment is not shown here). H: Rectum and sigmoid colon are pulled through the rectal muscular
                                   cuff to the anastomotic sites. I: Colon is transected at appropriate site with confirmation of ganglion cells by
                                   frozen section. J: Transanal, end-to-end single-layer colorectal anastomosis. (Reproduced with permission
                                   from Sato TT, Oldham KT: Pediatric abdomen. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds.
                                   Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1333 =====
Pull-Through for Hirschsprung’s Disease        1333

                   in the hope that the transition zone is distal to it. This is a significantly faster procedure, followed by permanent sec-
                   tions on which ganglia are more easily identified; it is inadequate in 10–20% of “long-segment” patients.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Hirschsprung’s disease; congenital aganglionosis; congenital megacolon

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Preliminary Colostomy                           Pull-through

                     Position                Supine                                          Supine → lithotomy

                     Incision                LLQ transverse                                  Low transverse

                     Special                 None                                            Staplers
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Frozen section to confirm ganglion cells        No monitors or iv lower extremity; frozen
                       considerations                                                        sections

                     Antibiotics             Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin      ⇐
                                             2.5 mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time           1–1.5 h                                         1–2 h (POOP)
                                                                                             3–4 h (Duhamel, Swenson, Soave)

                     Closing                 None                                            Reprep/drape
                       considerations

                     EBL                     < 5 mL/kg                                       5–10 mL/kg

                     Postop care             Cardiac/apnea monitor                           PICU

                     Mortality               With enterocolitis: 10%                         < 5%
                                             Without enterocolitis: 0–2%

                     Morbidity               Prolapse                                        Anastomotic leak: 5%
                                             Stricture                                       Wound infection: 4%
                                             Hernia                                          Pelvic abscess: 3%

                     Pain score              4                                               6–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Newborn–18 mo (normally)                                   1 yr

                     Male:Female             4:1                                                        ⇐

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                     Incidence               1/5000                                                     ⇐

                     Etiology                Unknown                                                    ⇐

                     Associated              Trisomy 21 (5%); GU anomalies (< 5%);                      ⇐
                       conditions            neurofibromatoses

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATivE
                   Children with Hirschsprung’s disease (congenital aganglionosis) may have had prior colostomies and may present for
                   colorectal reanastomosis. They may be mildly malnourished, but otherwise healthy.

===== PAGE 1334 =====
1334   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   GI                      Diarrhea may be present with associated malabsorption state.
                                                           Tests: Electrolytes

                                   Laboratory              Hct; T&C

                                   Premedication           For infants > 7–9 mo, consider midazolam 0.5 mg/kg po administered 30 min. before
                                                           induction.

                                         INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Combined epidural/GETA, warm OR to 75–80°F; forced-air warmer.

                                   Induction               Mask induction, unless iv is already in place. Keep air leak around ETT to 18–35 cmH2O.
                                                           For more involved procedure, consider placement of epidural catheter.

                                   Maintenance             Low-dose volatile agent and air/O2 with muscle relaxation for majority of cases. Epidural
                                                           anesthesia provides the majority of analgesia, but not the required degree of muscle relax-
                                                           ation. Supplemental muscle relaxants (e.g., rocuronium 0.1 mg/kg or vecuronium 0.1 mg/
                                                           kg) are necessary.

                                   Emergence               The goal is to extubate at end of case. Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine
                                                           (0.07 mg/kg iv) and atropine (0.02 mg/kg) or glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg).

                                   Blood and fluid         Mild blood loss                        These cases are usually not associated with large
                                      requirements         IV: 20–22 ga × 1–2 in upper            blood losses. Use 5% albumin for rapid volume
                                                           extremities                            expansion, if needed. As a result of bowel prep,
                                                           NS/LR @ 10 mL/kg/h                     patient may require 10–20 mL/kg iv of NS/LR to
                                                                                                  offset volume deficit. Neonates should have supple-
                                                                                                  mental glucose infusion.

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (See p. D-1)         Maintain UO @ 1 mL/kg/h.
                                                           Urinary catheter
                                                           ± Arterial line (22 ga)

                                   Positioning             3 padding, particularly over lateral fibular head (common peroneal nerve)
                                                           3 eyes

                                   Complications           Hypothermia                            Majority of heat loss is radiant (skin), but potential
                                                           Hypovolemia                            for large volume shifts mandates warming fluids.

                                        POSTOPERATivE
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Complications           Hypothermia
                                                           Hypovolemia

                                   Pain                    Continuous epidural                    Ropivacaine or Bupivacaine ± hydromorphone,
                                     management            Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg q 1–2°)       clonidine will provide analgesia for 8–16 h (see
                                                           Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg        p. E-4).
                                                           q 1–2°)
                                                           Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv/po
                                                           q 6°; one time dose 30–40 mg/kg PR,
                                                           continuing doses 20 mg/kg PR q 6°)

                                   Tests                   Hct if sig blood loss

===== PAGE 1335 =====
Pull-Through for Imperforate Anus, Cloaca           1335

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Georgeson KE, Robertson DJ: Laparoscopic-assisted approaches for the definitive surgery for Hirschsprung’s disease. Semin
                        Pediatr Surg 2004; 13(4):256–62.
                     2. Tannuri AC, Tannuri U, Romao RL: Transanal endorectal pull-through in children with Hirschsprung’s disease—technical
                        refinements and comparison of results with the Duhamel procedure. J Pediatr Surg 2009; 44(4):767–72.

                   Pull-Through for Imperforate Anus, Cloaca
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Imperforate anus anomalies are classified as high or low, depending on whether the distal rectum
                   ends above or below the levator muscle. Usually the rectum terminates as a “fistula” entering the perineum or pelvic
                   structures anterior to the external anal sphincter. Rarely the rectum ends blindly, often associated with Trisomy 21.
                   If the fistula terminates on the perineum, it is called a “perineal fistula” or “anterior anus.” In girls, it often terminates
                   inside the fourchette but outside the hymen, called a “vestibular” fistula. Fistulas to the vagina or uterus are rare;
                   when they occur, they may be in conjunction with urethral anomalies. This combined structure—including rectum,
                   vagina, and urethra—is called a “cloaca.” In boys, the fistula often ends in the urethra, occasionally the prostate, and
                   rarely the bladder neck.
                   Surgical approach: At birth, associated conditions (e.g., VACTERL syndrome) are excluded while one waits 24
                   hours for the appearance of meconium through a sometimes-hard-to-see perineal fistula. The operation is then
                   performed according to the estimated site of the fistula. Low lesions are dilated or repaired; high lesions are treated
                   with a divided RLQ or loop colostomy. Definitive repair of high lesions occurs after several months following contrast
                   studies. This operation—called a perineal sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP) or Pena procedure—is performed in
                   the prone jackknife position. If the fistula is high, it occasionally will be necessary to turn the patient over for abdomi-
                   nal mobilization of the sigmoid colon.
                   Laparoscopic approaches are quickly replacing the PSARP, especially for high lesions. High lesions are also amenable
                   to early laparoscopic mobilization and pull-through. This can be done with low fistulas as well, but dissection of
                   the common wall between the urethra and fistula must be performed with care.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Imperforate anus

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Low Lesions                                       High Lesions

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                     Position                 Supine, lithotomy                                 Prone, possible turn to spine or lithotomy

                     Incision                 Midline perineal                                  Midline sacral, transverse abdominal

                     Special                  Muscle stimulator                                 ⇐ + Urethral sound; vaginal pack
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   None                                              Pressure points; prone position
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              Preop: ampicillin 25 mg/kg iv + gentamicin        ⇐
                                              2.5 mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time            1–1.5 h                                           3–6 h

                     EBL                      < 5 mL/kg                                         5–10 mL/kg

                     Postop care              Apnea monitor if neonate

                     Mortality                20%, due to associated anomalies                  ≤ 40%, due to associated anomalies

===== PAGE 1336 =====
1336   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                           Low Lesions                                      High Lesions

                                    Morbidity              Anal stenosis: 5–10%                             ⇐
                                                           Mucosal prolapse: 5%                             Intestinal obstruction: 5–10%
                                                                                                            Neurogenic bladder: < 5%
                                                                                                            Urethral stricture: 1–3%

                                    Pain score             3–4                                              5–6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              Newborn–6 mo                                             12–18 mo

                                    Male:Female            1.5:1                                                    ⇐

                                    Incidence              1/5000                                                   ⇐

                                    Etiology               Unknown                                                  ⇐

                                    Associated             CHD (common); esophageal atresia (15%); GU anoma-        ⇐
                                      conditions           lies; sacral/spinal cord anomalies; VATER association

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATivE
                                   Definitive repair is performed via the sacral and/or perineal route at ~12 mo. Children with rectal or anal agenesis
                                   without fistula will have had colostomies in newborn period. Other anomalies (e.g., VATER association VATER/
                                   VACTERL, vertebral anomalies, anal agenesis, cardiac defects, tracheoesophageal fistula [TEF]), esophageal atresia
                                   (EA), and/or renal or radial bone abnormalities may be present.

                                   Respiratory              If VATER association present, 3 cervical spine. Avoid extreme head flexion. If prior TEF
                                                            repair, concerns as previously noted in Anesthetic Considerations for Repair of Tracheo-
                                                            esophageal Fistula/Esophageal Atresia, p. 1289.
                                                            Tests: CXR; cervical spine film

                                   Cardiovascular           Patients with VATER association have a 20% incidence of CHD (e.g., VSD). Obtain echo-
                                                            cardiogram and, if needed, cardiology consultation preop.
                                                            Tests: ECHO

                                   Gastrointestinal         Colostomy may be present; thus, anesthesia records may be available for review.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Renal                    Renal abnormalities may be present.
                                                            Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                                   Musculoskeletal          Radial bone deformities may be present.

                                   Laboratory               Hct; T&C (3 parental/directed donor blood availability.)

                                   Premedication            If > 9 mo, consider midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) 30 min prior to arrival in OR.

                                       INTRAOPERATivE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Combined epidural/GETA, warm OR to 75°–80°F; heating pad on OR table.

                                   Induction                Standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1). Secure iv access and administer muscle relax-
                                                            ant (e.g., rocuronium 0.5–1 mg/kg or vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg) to facilitate ET intubation.
                                                            Maintain air leak at > 18–35 cmH2O. Lumbar epidural catheter inserted after induction.

===== PAGE 1337 =====
Repair of Inguinal & Umbilical Hernias, Hydrocele             1337

                    Maintenance                Volatile agent/air/O2 with epidural analgesia (2 cc ropivacaine 0.2% or bupivacaine 0.25%),
                                               or morphine (0.1 mg/kg iv), hydromorphone (10–15 mcg/kg iv), or fentanyl (2–5 mcg/kg
                                               iv). Maintain neuromuscular blockade as surgically indicated.

                    Emergence                  Usually extubated at end of case. Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine
                                               (0.07 mg/kg iv) and atropine (0.02 mg/kg iv). Ability to flex hips is a sign of adequate
                                               reversal.

                    Blood and fluid            Moderate blood/3rd-space losses             Place ivs in upper extremities because positioning
                       requirements            IV: 20–22 ga × 2                            of legs may impede venous flow. 3rd-space losses
                                               NS/LR@ maintenance                          ~5 mL/kg/h. Neonates should have supplemental
                                                                                           glucose infusion.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)              Maintain UO @ 0.5–1 mL/kg/h. Marked arterial
                                               Urinary catheter                            wave-form variation with ventilation is a sensitive
                                               ± 24-ga radial arterial line                indicator of hypovolemia. ABG/Hct/glucose prn.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                   Patient may be turned during procedure.
                                               3 eyes

                    Complications              Metabolic acidosis                          Mild metabolic acidosis may occur with significant
                                               Hypovolemia →↓ BP                           bleeding, or when 3rd-space losses are replaced
                                               Hypothermia                                 with bicarbonate-deficient fluids (NS, albumin 5%,
                                                                                           PRBCs).

                         POSTOPERATivE

                    Complications              Subglottic edema
                                               Respiratory depression 2° to opiates

                    Pain                       Continuous epidural analgesia.              See p. E-4.
                      management               Fentanyl (1–2 mg/kg iv q 1 h prn),          Aggressive pain management warranted.
                                               Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv q
                                               1–4 h)
                                               Dilaudid (0.002 mg/kg iv q 1 h)

                    Tests                      Hct
                                               ABG
                                               Electrolytes

                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                     1. Schecter NL, Berde CB,Yaster M, eds: Pain in Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                        2002.
                     2. Sydorak RM, Albanese CT: Laparoscopic repair of high imperforate anus. Semin Pediatr Surg 2002; 11(4):217–25.

                   Repair of Inguinal & Umbilical Hernias,
                   Hydrocele
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Inguinal hernia repair (herniorrhaphy) and its variant, hydrocele repair, are the most frequently
                   performed operations in pediatric surgery. Most pediatric hernias are indirect; they occur when the processus vagi-
                   nalis (a small pouch of peritoneum dragged down to the scrotum during gonadal descent) fails to obliterate. Infants,

===== PAGE 1338 =====
1338   c h a p t e r 12.5    Pediatric General Surgery

                                   particularly the premature, are more likely than toddlers to develop bilateral and incarcerated hernias. Hydroceles
                                   are identical to hernias in origin but have a smaller neck and derive their name because this neck is so small that only
                                   intraperitoneal fluid, not bowel, can pass through it. Hydroceles tend to close spontaneously (~80%) during the first
                                   2 yr of life; those that fail to resolve are repaired at ~2 yr. Hydroceles are termed “communicating” when they empty/
                                   fill with postural change. Umbilical hernias have a tendency to close over the first 5 yr of life (~95%), and are repaired
                                   when large (> 2 cm) or persistent. Complications of hernia/hydrocele repair include damage to the vas deferens or
                                   testicular vessels, metachronous contras-lateral hernias (~10%) if just one side is repaired initially, and a very low in-
                                   cidence of infertility when bilateral repairs are undertaken. Bleeding, if any, is minor, recurrence uncommon (≤ 1%),
                                   and bowel resection is rarely necessary, even when a hernia is incarcerated. Overnight admission for apnea monitor-
                                   ing is suggested in premature children (≤ 54–60 wk corrected age). Hydrocele repair complications are similar to
                                   those of herniorrhaphy. Umbilical hernia repairs have very few complications. Acetaminophen PR at the beginning
                                   of the procedure aids postop pain management.
                                   Surgical approach: Inguinal hernias and hydroceles are repaired through a lower-lateral abdominal skin crease
                                   incision (more recently, laparoscopically), permitting separation of the sac from spermatic cord structures, followed
                                   by high ligation ± distal fenestration (in hydroceles). Umbilical hernia repair is performed through a transverse inci-
                                   sion in the infraumbilical skin fold, through which the sac is resected from the undersurface of the skin and healthy
                                   fascial edges closed.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Inguinal hernia; umbilical hernia; hydrocele

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Inguinal                                        Umbilical

                                    Position                 Supine                                          ⇐

                                    Incision                 Inguinal, bilateral                             Infraumbilical

                                    Unique                   Prematurity                                     Abdominal compression if hernia large
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              None                                            ⇐

                                    Surgical time            40 min                                          ⇐

                                    Closing                  Nerve block, caudal                             Umbilical block
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      5 mL/kg                                         ⇐

                                    Postop care              Apnea monitor; hospitalization for premature    None
                                                             infants

                                    Mortality                < 1%                                            ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Morbidity                Apnea                                           None
                                                             Recurrence

                                    Pain score               3–5                                             3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                Premature–adolescent                            > 2 yr

                                    Male:Female              5:1                                             N/A

                                    Incidence                1–2%                                            1%

                                    Etiology                 Patent processus vaginalis                      Persistent umbilical defect

                                    Associated               Gonadal dysgenesis (Rare)                       None
                                      conditions

===== PAGE 1339 =====
Repair of Inguinal & Umbilical Hernias, Hydrocele         1339

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Hernia repair is most commonly performed in otherwise healthy infants in the first 2 yr of life, often on an outpatient
                   basis. It is also performed on premature infants (< 37-wk gestational age at birth). Premature infants are particularly
                   prone to inguinal hernias. Postop apnea can occur in infants ≤ 60 wk postconceptual age, particularly if the infant
                   was premature, has neurologic disease, anemia, or required intensive care in the early neonatal period. Infants ≤ 60
                   wk postconception usually require overnight admission Br monitoring (postop apnea and ↓ HR).

                    Respiratory              Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), tracheomalacia, and subglottic stenosis are conse-
                                             quences of prolonged mechanical ventilation and immature lungs at birth. 3 prior NICU
                                             Hx. ↓ FRC and ↑ PVR make infants with BPD more susceptible to hypoxia. They may
                                             require supplemental nasal O2 on a chronic basis, have immature respiratory centers, and
                                             may exhibit paradoxical apneic/bradycardic episodes in response to hypoxemia.
                                             Tests: CXR

                    Cardiovascular           Prior PDA ligation is possible. These patients may be on diuretic therapy for intrinsic lung
                                             disease (e.g., BPD) with resultant decreased intravascular volume.
                                             Tests: CXR; electrolytes

                    Neurological             Premature infants may be prone to seizure disorders.
                                             Tests: Anticonvulsant levels

                    Hematologic              Anemia is common at ~3 mo of age (physiologic nadir) and increases risk of postop apnea.

                    Tests                    Hct; PT; PTT; Plt, as indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            If appropriate (e.g., infants > 9 mo), midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) 30 min prior to arrival in OR.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Typically, GETA or LMA (± caudal [especially for bilateral repair] or ilioinguinal/iliohypo-
                   gastric block [for single-sided repair]). An alternative in ex-preterm infants at high risk for postop apnea is spinal
                   anesthesia without GA (see p. E-4), though this is practiced more rarely. Warm OR to 75°–80° F and use a forced-air
                   warmer

                    Induction                Mask induction in children with sevoflurane/N2O/O2. Secure iv. If appropriate, position
                                             child for placement of caudal anesthetic: ropivacaine 0.2% or bupivacaine 0.25% ± epineph-
                                             rine 1:200,000 @ 1 mL/kg (max 10cc). If child otherwise healthy and >18 mo old, can pro-

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                                             ceed with LMA; otherwise, tracheal intubation is preferred. If premature, consider atropine.
                                             Intubation may be facilitated with rocuronium (0.5–1 mg/kg) or vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg).

                    Maintenance              Standard pediatric inhalational anesthetic (see p. D-2) is appropriate. With caudal anes-
                                             thetic or nerve block, decrease amount of volatile anesthetic and avoid or reduce opiates.
                                             If LMA and spontaneous ventilation is used, deepen anesthetic to 2 MAC of inhalational
                                             agents at incision to minimize risk of laryngospasm. Caudal onset time 10–15 min.

                    Emergence                Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg iv) and atropine (0.02 mg/
                                             kg iv). Extubate only when fully awake. LMA may be removed deep and oral airway is
                                             placed.

                    Blood and fluid          Negligible blood loss                   Infants receiving diuretics will require 10–20 mL/
                       requirements          IV: 22–24 ga × 1                        kg iv of NS/LR to avoid ↓ BP 2° volatile anesthet-
                                             NS/LR @ maintenance                     ics. In children < 1 mo old, use dextrose-containing
                                                                                     iv solution (e.g., D10W for maintenance, LR for
                                                                                     replacement fluids)

===== PAGE 1340 =====
1340   c h a p t e r 12.5      Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. D-1)              Premature infants may become hypoglycemic.
                                                                                                           3 blood glucose during surgery.

                                   Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                               3 eyes

                                   Complications               Laryngospasm
                                                               Bronchospasm                                Rx bronchospasm: albuterol inhaler, mist, mask,
                                                               Local anesthetic toxicity                   deepen anesthesia
                                                               Hypothermia
                                                               Hypoglycemia

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Apnea/bradycardia                           Can ↓ incidence of apnea/bradycardia by adminis-
                                                               Subglottic edema                            tering caffeine (10 mg/kg iv) intraop or in NICU/
                                                                                                           PACU.

                                   Pain                        Field block                                 If no caudal used, a field block (bupivacaine 0.25%
                                     management                Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg po/iv,              2–3 mL) at end of surgery reduces pain in the
                                                               20 mg/kg PR q 6° prn)                       immediate postop period. It is usually performed
                                                                                                           by the surgeon.

                                   Tests/monitoring            Apnea monitor and pulse oximeter            Caffeine is no substitute for monitoring and atten-
                                                               for 12–18 h for: term infants               tive parents/nurses.
                                                               ≤ 44 wk; premature infants
                                                               ≤ 60 wk

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Gregory GA: Anesthesia for premature infants. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th
                                        edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, Sussex, UK: 2012, 475–96.
                                     2. Laituri CA, Gareey CL, Peiters B, et al: Overnight observation in former premature infants undergoing inguinal hernia repair.
                                        J Pediatr Surg 2012; 47(1):217–20.
                                     3. Morton NS, Fairgrieve R, Moores A, et al: Anesthesia for the full-term and ex-premature infants. In: Gregory GA, Andropolous
                                        DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, Sussex, UK: 2012, 497–519.

                                   Surgery for the Undescended Testicle
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Also called “cryptorchidism,” this occurs when a testicle fails to follow the usual pattern of descent.
                                   Testicles begin fetal life just inferior to the kidney and, through differential growth, migrate to the base of the ipsi-
                                   lateral hemiscrotum, attached there by the gubernaculum. Problems occur when testicular descent does not occur,
                                   occurs partially, or occurs incorrectly. Testicles that are found in the abdomen, inguinal canal, perineum, thigh,
                                   suprapubic fat, or contralateral scrotum may be associated with subsequent problems, including infertility and ma-
                                   lignant degeneration. Transposition and fixation of the testicles into their normal location (orchidopexy), does not
                                   eliminate these problems; rather, it places the testicle in a position where it can be more easily evaluated and may
                                   mitigate the progressive infertility thought to occur when testicles remain outside the scrotum. Because testicular
                                   descent is a dynamic process, cryptorchidism is not addressed until 18–24 mo of life since a significant portion of
                                   initially cryptorchid testes will descend into the scrotum during this time.
                                   Surgical approach: The operation begins in a similar fashion to a hernia repair, as 95% of cryptorchid testes have
                                   an associated hernia sac. One exception is if the testicle is thought to be intraabdominal. In this circumstance, many

===== PAGE 1341 =====
Surgery for the Undescended Testicle      1341

                   surgeons will begin with a laparoscopic abdominal examination, using the vas deferens and testicular vessels to locate
                   the testis. If it is high in the abdomen, it may be brought immediately to the perineum (difficult if the testicular vessels
                   are short), or a two-step Fowler-Stevens approach is undertaken. In this approach, the gubernacular vessels supply-
                   ing the inferior pole of the testis are encouraged to hypertrophy by division of the spermatic vessels, and the testicle
                   is left in the abdomen near the internal ring. At a second operation ~6 months later, the testicle is brought down,
                   much as in the primary operation following hernia repair. This involves creation of a passage down to the base of the
                   ipsilateral hemiscrotum, through which the testicle is advanced as far as the vas deferens permits. The tough outer
                   layer of the testicle—the tunica albuginea—is then attached to the scrotum in a subcutaneous pocket outside the
                   dartos fascia to discourage migration back up to a high location. There is scant blood loss; however, there is a small
                   risk to testicular viability. Small, high, abnormal testes with short vessels and vas associated with poor gubernacular
                   vessels are deemed better removed than left in a high location where malignant degeneration might go undetected.
                   A caudal block may be preferable to injection of local anesthesia at multiple sites.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Undescended testicle; cryptorchidism

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Orchidopexy                                         First of Two-stage Repair

                     Position                 Supine                                              ⇐

                     Incision                 Lower groin crease                                  Laparoscopic or open

                     Special                  –                                                   One to three ports if laparoscopic
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   Length of vas and vessels                           Length of vas deferens
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              None                                                ⇐

                     Surgical time            1–1.5 h                                             30 min

                     EBL                      < 5 mL/kg                                           ⇐

                     Postop care              Home                                                ⇐

                     Mortality                < 1%                                                ⇐

                     Morbidity                Bleeding                                            ⇐
                                              Orchiectomy

                     Pain score               4–5                                                 2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                     Age range                18–24 mo

                     Incidence                1/2000 births

                     Etiology                 Unknown

                     Associated               Prematurity; gastroschisis; intersex anomaly; Turner’s syndrome (potential for airway, cardiac,
                       conditions             and renal problems)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Urology, Inguinoscrotal Procedures, p. 1375.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Thorup J, Haugen S, Kollin C, et al: Surgical treatment of undescended testes. Acta Paediatr 2007; 96(5):631–7.

===== PAGE 1342 =====
1342   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Resection of Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Occasionally during gestation, a group of cells composing all three germ layers segregates and begins
                                   autonomous development as a teratoma. When this occurs just anterior to the coccyx, the tumor may remain small
                                   and local, or grow up into the abdomen or down into the peritoneum, attaining sizes as large as the child itself.
                                   Although a few centers attempt fetal surgery for very large lesions, in most hospitals the child is delivered by the
                                   appropriate route (cesarean delivery for large external lesions), and the mass is addressed in the neonatal period
                                   or whenever it is diagnosed thereafter. Most (though not all) sacrococcygeal teratomas (SCTs) are initially benign;
                                   however, they may soon transform into malignancy beginning at 2 mo of age.
                                   Surgical approach: Small teratomas are approached prone from the rectum; larger ones, with high blood flow, may
                                   first have an intraabdominal procedure to ligate feeding vessels and mobilize the tumor. Once prone, a V-shaped
                                   incision is created down to the posterior aspect of the anteriorly displaced anus. Surgical principles of dissection
                                   include avoiding entry into the rectum (a colostomy is rarely necessary); meticulous hemostasis, including ligation
                                   of the median sacral artery; and removal of the coccyx, from which the tumor arises and may recur. At the end of
                                   the procedure, the levator muscles are brought together, and the anus is suspended from the presacral fascia. Bleed-
                                   ing can be massive, and adjacent structures (bowel, bladder, and presacral nerve plexus) are distorted and prone to
                                   injury.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Sacrococcygeal teratoma
                                   Differential diagnosis: May appear similar to meningomyelocele.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Prone, sometimes preceded by supine

                                    Incision               Perineal chevron, sometimes preceded by transverse abdominal

                                    Special                Hegar dilators
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                 Intraabdominal blood supply
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics            Ampicillin 25 mg/kg and gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time          2–5 h

                                    Closing                Extubation depends on duration and blood loss
                                      considerations
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    EBL                    20–80 mL/kg

                                    Postop care            NICU, prone

                                    Mortality              Fetal, due to hydrops and high flow state; < 10% neonatal

                                    Morbidity              Bleeding
                                                           Colostomy
                                                           Pelvic nerve damage → bowel and bladder dysfunction
                                                           Recurrence and/or malignant degeneration

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              1–2 mo

                                    Male:Female            1:1

===== PAGE 1343 =====
Resection of Sacrococcygeal Teratoma        1343

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence             1/15,000 births

                     Etiology              Unknown

                     Associated            Constipation; heart failure; Currarino’s triad; malignant degeneration
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Sacrococcygeal teratoma is a rare tumor of infancy. Sometimes diagnosed prenatally, it also can present as late as
                   18–24 mo. Patients may present with urinary obstruction by the tumor mass; lower extremity pain, numbness, or
                   weakness; or bowel obstruction. ~10% may have a sacral anomaly or myelomeningocele.

                    Respiratory             There may be respiratory compromise as a result of a large abdominal mass pushing up on
                                            the abdominal contents and the diaphragm.
                                            Tests: CXR, if indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular          Sacrococcygeal teratoma may be associated with high-output cardiac failure due to AV
                                            fistulae within the tumor. Consultation with a cardiologist may be appropriate.
                                            Tests: ECG; ECHO may be necessary.

                    Renal                   Postrenal obstruction may compromise renal function.
                                            Tests: BUN; Cr

                    Gastrointestinal        Intestinal compression by the tumor may cause ↑ risk of gastric aspiration.
                                            Tests: Electrolytes

                    Hematologic             This tumor may be associated with coagulopathy.
                                            Tests: PT; PTT; INR

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Patients > 9 mo may benefit from midazolam (0.5 mg/kg) po 30 min. before surgery. If
                                            iv is present, iv midazolam 0.05–0.1 mg/kg may be used (e.g., for 10 kg child, 0.5–1 mg
                                            midazolam).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, using a pediatric circle; warm OR to 75–80°F; warm all iv fluids. Due to risk of co-

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                   agulopathy and the possibility of spine malformations, epidural catheter usually is not considered.

                    Induction               Usually an inhalation induction. If an iv is present, then an iv induction is performed. A
                                            modified rapid-sequence induction is recommended in those patients with a large intraab-
                                            dominal mass compressing the GI tract. Otherwise, standard pediatric induction (see p. D-1)
                                            is appropriate. The appropriate size for the ETT is one that will allow a small leak around the
                                            tube when positive pressure is applied (18–35 cmH2O).

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. D-3). Muscle relaxation is appropriate.

                    Emergence               Depending on blood loss and fluid requirements, the patient may need to remain intu-
                                            bated at the end of the procedure. If extubation is elected, suction NG and confirm air leak
                                            around ETT before extubation. If there is no air leak, consider laryngeal edema and the
                                            need for continued intubation.

===== PAGE 1344 =====
1344   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                   Blood and fluid            Potential for massive blood loss.        Tumor resection may be associated with massive
                                      requirements            IV: Two large-bore iv catheters          blood loss, due to large pelvic venous bed, AV fis-
                                                              (e.g., 20–22 ga)                         tula, coagulopathy. Close monitoring of Hct is nec-
                                                                                                       essary, along with correction of acidosis and Ca++
                                                                                                       replacement.

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitor (see p. D-1)
                                                              ± Central line
                                                              Arterial line (22 ga)

                                        POSTOPERATIVE
                                    Complications             Bleeding                                 PICU usually required. Maintain normothermia; cor-
                                                              Coagulopathy                             rect metabolic acidosis. Postop ventilation require-
                                                              Hypoventilation                          ment due to hypoventilation, laryngeal edema. Serial
                                                              Laryngeal edema                          Hct may help detect postop hemorrhage.

                                    Pain                      Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg/h iv               Approximate doses; titration required.
                                      management              Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv q 1–2 h)
                                                              Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01
                                                              mg/kg iv q 1–2 h)
                                                              Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv
                                                              q 6; 20 mg/kg pr q 6; one time
                                                              intraop dose 30–40 mg/kg pr)

                                    Tests                     ABG
                                                              Hct
                                                              PT/PTT

                                   Suggested Reading
                                     1. Cowles RA, Stolar CJ, Kandel JJ, et al: Preoperative angiography with embolization and radiofrequency ablation as novel
                                        adjuncts to safe surgical resection of a large, vascular sacrococcygeal teratoma. Pediatr Surg Int 2006; 22(6):554–6.

                                   Anesthesia for Minimally Invasive Surgery in
                                   Pediatric Patients
                                   Gregory B. Hammer
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   In recent years there has been a significant increase in the practice of minimally invasive surgery in pediatric patients.
                                   Specific considerations for these surgeries (as in adult patients) include the effects of pneumoperitoneum on respira-
                                   tory and cardiac function. ↑ abdominal pressure → ↓ diaphragmatic excursion, ↑ atelectasis, and V/Q mismatch.
                                   ↑ CO2 levels can be difficult to control with mechanical ventilation; thus, manual ventilation may be necessary.
                                   There is risk of pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum. Use of Trendelenburg position further decreases FRC and
                                   lung compliance and increases the work of breathing. Cephalad movement of the carina may cause endobronchial
                                   intubation. Venous return may be impaired, causing ↓ CO. These effects are most pronounced in children < 6 mo
                                   old. These children also may be at risk for reversal of L → R shunts through a patent foramen ovale (PFO) or ductus
                                   arteriosus.
                                   Minimally invasive procedures that are frequently performed in pediatrics include appendectomy, pyloric stenosis,
                                   hernia repair, Nissen fundoplication, cholecystectomy, splenectomy, laparoscopically assisted bowel resection, tho-
                                   racoscopy (VATS), and congenital diaphragmatic hernia repair. The general principles for anesthesia for minimally
                                   invasive surgery in pediatric patients are as follows:

===== PAGE 1345 =====
Anesthesia for Minimally Invasive Surgery in Pediatric Patients           1345

                         PREOPERATIVE
                        1. Be vigilant about respiratory and cardiac function. Note baseline lung function (SaO2, CXR, ABG); 3 for any
                            cardiac defects (e.g., L → R shunt, ↓ CO).
                        2. Epidural usually not placed for laparoscopy or thoracoscopy, but it should be considered at the end of the
                            procedure if the decision is made to do open surgery, or for large resections. Consider need for PT/PTT if sig-
                            nificant bleeding, or if preop health status indicates (e.g., oncology PT, malnutrition, renal/liver dysfunction).
                        3. Blood should be available for major cases including VATS for empeyma. Although there usually is little blood
                            loss with minimally invasive surgery, the potential for large-vessel disruption exists.

                    Premedication             Patients > 7–9 mo may benefit from midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) 30 min before surgery.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA; forced-air warmer; warm OR to 70–75°F; warm iv fluids.

                    Induction                 Inhalation induction using sevoflurane, N2O, followed by iv placement. If patient is at risk
                                              for aspiration, rapid-sequence induction as appropriate. For ET intubation in children,
                                              cuffed tube is usually placed, with the goal is to attain a seal allowing for a leak of 18–35
                                              cmH2O. A cuffed tube is usually 1/2 size smaller than corresponding uncuffed tube for age.
                                              If OLV is required, see Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Thoracic Surgery p. 1297,
                                              for placement. Note distance of end of ETT from carina. As abdominal girth is increased
                                              during CO2 insufflation, it is common for the tube to advance to an endobronchial position.

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. D-3). Muscle relaxation is appropriate. An OG tube is placed
                                              to empty the stomach of any residual premedication and excess air introduced during PPV.
                                              Continued communication between anesthesiologist and surgeon is essential. Pay atten-
                                              tion to changes in positioning (e.g., Trendelenburg), intraabdominal pressure (n1 = 15
                                              cmH2O), airway pressures, BP. Recheck that BS = after insufflation, as cephalad movement
                                              of diaphragm may lead to endobronchial intubation.

                    Emergence                 In most cases, the patient can be extubated at the end of surgery.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 22–20-ga catheter × 1                Potential for 3rd space and blood loss, especially
                       requirements           Maintenance fluids                       with VATS surgery for empyema.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1)           Consider arterial line if patient has significant car-
                                              ± Arterial line                          diac or respiratory compromise.
                                              Urinary catheter

                                              3 and pad pressure points

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                    Positioning
                                              3 eyes

                    Complications             ↑ CO2 (40–50 mm Hg) (common)
                                              ↑ PIP (common)
                                              Subcutaneous crepitus (moderately
                                              common)                                  2° Trendelenburg position, ↑ abdominal girth. In
                                              Endobronchial intubation(common)         thoracoscopy, if SLV is used, may need to raise lung
                                              Difficult ventilating (common)           and ventilate transiently.
                                                                                       → ↓ CO. Rx: crystalloid or albumin 10–20 mL/kg.

                                              Hypovolemia
                                              Pneumothorax                             CO2 embolus (rare)
                                              Pneumomediastinum (rare)
                                              Inadvertent cannulation of vessel
                                              (rare)

===== PAGE 1346 =====
1346   c h a p t e r 12.5      Pediatric General Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Respiratory function impairment             Respiratory function may still be significantly
                                                               Bleeding                                    impaired in the postop period and should be moni-
                                                               Residual subcutaneous CO2                   tored closely.
                                                               Pneumothorax

                                   Pain                        Ketorolac 0.5 mg/kg iv q 6 h      If significant intraoperative bleeding, avoid ketoro-
                                     management                Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv       lac for 24 h postop
                                                               q 1–2 h)
                                                               Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg
                                                               iv q 1–2 h)
                                                               Acetaminophen (10 mg/kg iv q 6;
                                                               20 mg/kg pr q 6; one-time intraop
                                                               dose 30–40 mg/kg pr)

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracic, urologic, and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis
                                        FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Mosby Inc., Philadelphia: 2011, 745–9.
                                     2. Sun LS, Saraiya NR, Houck PJ: Anesthesia for abdominal surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropolous DB, eds. Gregory’s Pediatric
                                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, West Sussex, UK: 2012, 736–8.

                                   Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment (Exit)
                                   Procedure
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The EXIT (Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment) strategy was developed as a means of establishing an
                                   airway after iatrogenic occlusion of the fetal trachea to promote lung growth for fetuses with severe congenital
                                   diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). The EXIT strategy can be viewed as a “half ” delivery in which a hysterotomy is per-
                                   formed, only the head and shoulders are “delivered”, and uterine relaxation is maintained by high concentrations of
                                   an inhalational anesthetic and intravenous tocolytics, ensuring the maintenance of uteroplacental blood flow and gas
                                   exchange. Using this strategy, operations as long as 3 h on uteroplacental “bypass” have been performed without sig-
                                   nificant maternal bleeding and uterine contraction. It provides time to perform procedures such as direct laryngos-
                                   copy, bronchoscopy, tracheotomy, arterial and venous access, administration of surfactant, resection of neck or lung
                                   masses, and cannulation for ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) support, thereby converting a potential
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   emergent crisis into a controlled situation.
                                   Surgical technique: A successful EXIT procedure is a carefully orchestrated event in which all members of the
                                   OR team have specific roles and responsibilities. The scrubbed personnel consist of two pediatric/fetal surgeons,
                                   a maternal-fetal medicine specialist/obstetrician, a pediatric anesthesiologist, a neonatologist, other specialists as
                                   indicated, with appropriate nurses and techs as needed. Unlike the EXIT procedure, a conventional Cesarean de-
                                   livery makes no attempt to prevent bleeding from the hysterotomy because hemostasis is achieved by return of
                                   uterine tone following the relatively rapid delivery of the fetus. Because of the significant hemorrhage from a con-
                                   ventional hysterotomy, the EXIT procedure is carried out using a hemostatic uterine stapling device (US Surgi-
                                   cal CS 57, US Surgical/Tyco, Norwalk, CT). First, a low transverse skin crease incision is used. The decision to use
                                   a Mallard versus Pfannenstiel fascial incision is determined by uterine size (e.g., presence/absence polyhydram-
                                   nios) and placental position. If the operation is performed in the late 3rd trimester and the placenta is posteri-
                                   or or fundic, the lower uterine segment can be opened and the uterus left in situ. An anterior or previa placenta
                                   often necessitates moving the uterus out of the abdomen/pelvis. The hysterotomy in this situation is not in the
                                   lower uterine segment. Intraop ultrasonography is critical to map placental position. If polyhydramnios is present,
                                   amnioreduction is performed to avoid underestimation of the proximity of the placental edge to the hysterotomy.
                                   Two applications of the uterine stapler are usually necessary for an adequate opening. Bleeding often occurs where

===== PAGE 1347 =====
Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment (Exit) Procedure          1347

                   the staple lines fail to intersect and is easily controlled with suture ligation. Only the necessary fetal parts are de-
                   livered in order to maintain uterine volume and avoid vigorous contractions and placental separation. A sterile
                   pulse oximeter is attached to the palm of the fetal hand. It is covered with foil and Tegaderm tape to prevent
                   aberrant readings due to the operating room lights. The long oximeter cord is passed across the field to the anes-
                   thesiologist. The fetal eyes are covered with a warm wet laparotomy pad. The fetus is continuously bathed in warm
                   saline. Care is taken not to manipulate or unnecessarily expose the umbilical cord to avoid spasm of the vessels.
                   Sterile instruments that need to be available include a laryngoscope with at least two different sized blades and extra
                   bulbs (batteries are not sterilized and are inserted separately), two sizes of a rigid bronchoscope, a light cord, various
                   endotracheal (some with surfactant adapters) and tracheostomy tubes, endotracheal tube stylettes, a hand bag device
                   with a manometer and sterile tubing that is passed off the field to an oxygen source, a sterile neonatal stethoscope,
                   and a sterile syringe filled with surfactant (if necessary). IV access is obtained if possible. Alternatively, a mixture of
                   fentanyl and an NMB agent such as rocuronium, vecuronium, or pancuronium can be administered im (deltoid) to
                   the fetus immediately after the hysterotomy. After the airway is obtained and secured, the umbilical cord is clamped
                   and divided and the child taken to the resuscitation table by the neonatologist. The placenta is delivered and the
                   uterus closed in the standard fashion. Oxytocin is administered immediately prior to clamping the umbilical cord to
                   enhance uterine tone.
                   Indications: Clinical situations in which the fetal airway or cardiovascular well-being is significantly threatened by
                   conventional Cesarean or vaginal delivery are candidates for the EXIT strategy. Some examples are
                        • Intrinsic laryngotracheal anomalies resulting in congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS):
                           laryngeal web/atresia/cyst/stenosis, tracheal stenosis/atresia
                        • Extrinsic airway compression: cervical teratoma/lymphangioma (may or may not result in CHAOS)
                        • Epignathus
                        • Severe hydrops from a cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung after 32 wk gestation
                        • EXIT to ECMO for severe CDH with congenital heart disease
                        • Delivery of thoracoomphalopagus twins
                        • Delivery of twins discordant for a potentially obstructing neck lesion

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                L uterine displacement

                     Incision                Low transverse

                     Special Instructions    Fetal monitoring

                     Unique                  Need to maintain uterine relaxation
                       Considerations

                     Child                   Monitor for fetal hypoxia, bradycardia

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                     Surgical time           2h

                     Closing                 Extubation
                       Considerations

                     Postoperative care      Variable—moderate

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Risk of hemorrhage

                     ■■ STERILE EQUIPMENT (on surgical field)
                     ETT                     3.0 cuffed; 2.5, 3.0, 3.5 uncuffed, and available stylets

                     Laryngoscopes and       Miller 0,1 Wis-Hipple 1,1.5
                       blades

===== PAGE 1348 =====
1348   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                    ■■ STERILE EQUIPMENT (on surgical field) (cont’d)
                                    LMA                       1, 1.5

                                    Suction catheters        6 Fr, 8 Fr

                                     Other                    Mask, capnograph tubing, oral airways, umbilical tape, steri strips, stethoscope

                                    ■■ Nonsterile equipment READILY AVAILABLE
                                    Fiberoptic               Appropriate for neonatal airway
                                      bronchoscope

                                    Ambu-bag

                                    Additional oxygen
                                      source

                                   Maternal Risks and Outcomes: The most serious and immediate maternal risk during the EXIT procedure is
                                   intraop hemorrhage. This may result from uterine atony and can be minimized by decreasing the concentration of
                                   the inhalational anesthetic and administering oxytocin before umbilical cord ligation. This, in combination with the
                                   hemostatic uterine stapling device, has kept the average maternal blood loss well within the accepted range for tradi-
                                   tional Cesarean delivery. In addition, placental injury may occur during hysterotomy, resulting in hemorrhage. This
                                   has occurred in the setting of polyhydramnios, in which the edge of the placenta was compressed, obscuring it from
                                   view by the ultrasonographer. It is advisable to perform intraop amnioreduction in cases with severe polyhydramnios
                                   with a potentially nearby placenta before performing an EXIT procedure to allow better placental visualization. In
                                   one study, the short-term maternal outcomes after 34 EXIT procedures were compared to those from 52 nonlaboring
                                   patients who underwent nonemergent primary cesarean delivery of singleton fetuses. The rates of chorioamnion-
                                   itis and endometritis, and the postop hematocrit and hospital stays were similar between groups. The incidence of
                                   wound infection was increased in those undergoing EXIT procedure (15%) compared to controls (2%).
                                   Lower uterine segment transverse hysterotomy is preferred for the EXIT procedure as it allows the possibility of future
                                   vaginal delivery. However, a low anterior placenta or an extremely large neck mass may make this incision impossible.
                                   In such cases, a classical hysterotomy is necessary which would preclude future vaginal deliveries because of the risk
                                   of uterine rupture during labor. Thus, all pregnant women should be counseled that Cesarean delivery may be required
                                   for all future pregnancies and that there is an increased risk of abnormal placentation with subsequent pregnancies.

                                       ANESTHESIA CONSIDERATIONS
                                   The features that distinguish the EXIT procedure from a conventional Cesarean delivery are, in large part, due to
                                   the anesthetic management. Of paramount importance is the uterine relaxation achieved with an inhalational agent,
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   most commonly isoflurane. Isoflurane has been administered in concentrations up to 2.5% to completely anesthetize
                                   the fetus to allow fetal laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, tracheostomy, or tumor resection. Preservation of uteroplacen-
                                   tal gas exchange with high concentrations of maternal isoflurane is well tolerated by the fetus for EXIT procedures
                                   lasting up to 180 min. Careful attention to the maintenance of maternal systemic blood pressure, often with the use
                                   of phenylephrine and ephedrine, is essential to safely use the high concentration of isoflurane required for uterine
                                   relaxation. Intraop fluid administration is kept to an absolute minimum 2° the postop predisposition to maternal
                                   pulmonary edema while on tocolytic agents. Occasionally, additional uterine relaxation is required, even when the
                                   end-tidal isoflurane concentration is ≥ 2.5%. This suggests that extensive manipulation of the uterus, (e.g., forward
                                   displacement of the uterus to perform a posterior hysterotomy because of an anterior placenta), may stimulate the
                                   uterus to contract, even if high concentrations of isoflurane are used. For this situation, the intraop use of nitroglycer-
                                   ine provides excellent temporary uterine relaxation and is well tolerated. Pulmonary edema does not occur as a result
                                   of intraop intermittent dosing of nitroglycerine when it is used as an adjunct for uterine relaxation.

                                        PREOPERATivE
                                   Conduct a rigorous preop evaluation of the mother, including CV history; evaluate all fetal anomalies in question.
                                   The most common indication for an EXIT procedure is the presence of a prenatally diagnosed neck mass, which is

===== PAGE 1349 =====
Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment (Exit) Procedure          1349

                   anticipated to result in severe airway obstruction following birth; severe micrognathia, mandibular hypoplasia may
                   also require this approach. Preoperative consultation and coordination between treating providers is necessary.

                    Full stomach             Pretreatment with Bicitra 30 mL po, ranitidine 50 mg iv
                      precautions

                    Positioning              Left uterine displacement

                        INTRAOPERATivE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, rapid-sequence induction. Primary goal is to maintain complete uterine relaxation,
                   to support materal–fetal gas exchange, and ensure fetal oxygenation. Uterine blood flow is not autoregulated, but
                   directly related to MAP.
                   Maintain blood pressure with phenylephrine and ephedrine as necessary. Maintain fluid resuscitation to moderate
                   due to propensity of pulmonary edema while on tocolytic agents. High concentration of isoflurane or sevoflurane to
                   maintain uterine relaxation. Nitroglycerin can also be used to facilitate relaxation. Intrauterine infusion with normal
                   saline may be necessary to preserve uterine volume and prevent separation of placenta.

                    Induction                Rapid sequence induction, with propofol, and succinylcholine (see p. B-5).

                    Maintenance              Volatile agent at high concentration to maintain uterine relaxation. Propofol (150–250
                                             mcg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.2–0.5 mcg/kg/min) may help reduce uterine contractility
                                             in a dose-dependent manner and thereby reduce the need for large quantities of volatile
                                             anesthesia. With uterine exposure reduce propofol to 50–75 mcg/kg/min.

                    Special                  Coordination necessary between maternal anesthesia team, surgical team and pediatric
                      considerations         anesthesia regarding cord clamping and delivery. Cord is clamped, volatile agent imme-
                                             diately discontinued, N2O continued, fentanyl and midazolam given; oxytocin bolus and
                                             continuous infusion of oxytocin titrated to uterine response. Once hemostasis is achieved,
                                             and uterine tone is restored, anesthetic agents are restarted.

                    Care of fetus/           Infant: delivery of fetal head and upper extremity. Commence fetal monitoring with fetal
                      neonate                scalp electrode, O2 Sat monitoring (normal SaO2—65–75%). If possible, place iv catheter.
                                             Alternatively, additional anesthetic can be administered im via deltoid muscle (fentanyl
                                             2–3 mcg/kg; rocuronium 0.5–1 mg/kg, vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg, or pancuronium 0.1 mg/
                                             kg). After the airway is secured, the cord is clamped and delivery completed.
                                             Once airway secure, O2 sat should increase to > 90%. If unable to secure, consider surgical
                                             intervention. Secure ETT with umbilical tape, steri-strips. Secure iv access if not obtained
                                             previously. Hemodynamic management may include resuscitation with iv fluids, transfu-

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                             sion. Transfer to NICU unless further immediate surgical intervention needed.

                    Emergence                Usually extubated

                    Blood and fluid          Moderate blood loss                     Blood products available in room due to potential
                       requirements          IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2                      for hemorrhage; Cautious crystalloid administra-
                                                                                     tion due to potential for pulmonary edema related
                                                                                     to the use of tocolytics.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors                       CVP to guide fluid resuscitation
                                             A-line

                    Positioning              L-uterine displacement

                    Complications            Maternal hemorrhage
                                             Uterine atony

===== PAGE 1350 =====
1350   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Hemorrhage                                 3 H/H regularly (e.g., 30 min for the 1st h); trans-
                                     (maternal)                                                          fuse as necessary
                                                              Pulmonary edema                            2° overly aggressive resuscitation, prolonged use of
                                                                                                         NTG

                                   Complications              Hypovolemia                                2° fetal hemorrhage via umbilical cord
                                     (neonate)                Respiratory compromise                     2° aspiration, overresuscitation-ventilatory support as
                                                                                                         necessary

                                   Tests                      CXR to verify ETT position

                                   Pain                       Maternal                                     Patient-controlled analgesia
                                     management               Neonate                                       Fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg iv q 1° prn;
                                                                                                            Morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv q 1–2 h)
                                                                                                            Hydromorphone (0.005–0.01 mg/kg iv q 1–2 h)
                                                                                                            Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg iv q 6; 20mg/kg pr q 6;
                                                                                                            one-time intraop dose 30–40 mg/kg pr

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Bouchard S, Johnson MP, Flake AW, et al: The EXIT procedure: experience and outcome in 31 cases. J Pediatric Surgery 2002;
                                        37(3):418–26.
                                     2. Crombleholme TM, Albanese CT: The fetus with airway obstruction. In: Harrison MR, Evans MI, Adzick NS, et al, eds. The
                                        Unborn Patient. The Art and Science of Fetal Therapy. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2001, 357–71.
                                     3. Hedrick HL: Ex utero intrapartum therapy. Semin Pediatr Surg 2003; 12:190–5.
                                     4. Hirose S, Sydorak RM, Tsao K, et al: Spectrum of intrapartum management strategies for giant fetal cervical teratoma.
                                        J Pediatr Surg 2003; 38:446–50.
                                     5. Myers LB: Anesthesia for Ex Utero Intrapartum Treatment (EXIT Procedure). BC Decker Inc, Hamilton: 2005.
                                     6. Ngamprasertwong P, Vinks AA, Boat A: Update in fetal anesthesia for the ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure.
                                        Int Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 50(4):26–40.
                                     7. Noah MM, Norton ME, Sandberg P, et al: Short-term maternal outcomes that are associated with the EXIT procedure, as
                                        compared with cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002; 186:773–3.
                                     8. Otteson TD, Jackam DJ, Mandell DL: The ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure. Arch Otolaryng Head Neck Surg
                                        2006; 132:686–9.

                                   PEDIATRIC BARIATRIC SURGERY
                                   Description: Childhood obesity, defined by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control as a BMI above the 95th percentile
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   for age, is pandemic in the United States, with rates up to 18% for adolescents aged 12 to 19. Adolescent bariatric sur-
                                   gery has been shown to improve both the quality of life as well as significantly decrease the comorbidities of obesity
                                   including obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), hypertension, type II diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, pseudotu-
                                   mor cerebri, joint disease, and depression. There are two fundamental strategies to accomplish weight loss through
                                   surgery. The first approach is restriction in which the stomach volume is reduced to physically limit the amount of
                                   food that can be consumed comfortably at a given time. The second approach is malabsorption in which a given
                                   amount of intestine is bypassed to decrease absorptive capacity for nutrients.
                                   Surgical approach: Prior to any consideration of surgical intervention, pediatric patients with obesity must be as-
                                   sessed by a multidisciplinary team including pediatricians, psychologists, social workers, physical therapists, and nu-
                                   tritionists. Nonsurgical weight loss options should be thoroughly investigated and exhausted prior to offering surgery.
                                   The three most commonly performed procedures for obesity in the adolescent population are gastric band, sleeve
                                   gastrectomy, and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. The gastric band (Fig. 12.5-12) is an adjustable device surgically placed
                                   around the stomach just distal to the GE junction. The procedure is generally done laparoscopically. An access port is
                                   placed in the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen. The device variably compresses the stomach and restricts intake.
                                   Sleeve gastrectomy (Fig. 12.5-13) is performed by resecting the bulk of gastric tissue along the greater curvature

===== PAGE 1351 =====
Pediatric Bariatric Surgery   1351

                                            15-mL gastric
                                            pouch

                                            Adjustable
                                            gastric band

                                                                                               Subcutaneous
                                                                                               port

                               Figure 12.5-12. Gastric band approach.

                   leaving a small tubular stomach resulting in restriction and some malabsorption. The procedure is generally per-
                   formed with laparoscopic staplers using a bougie (34-40 Fr) or endoscope in the stomach to guide the sizing of
                   the resection. Finally, the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (Fig. 12.5-14) involves division of the stomach leaving a small
                   gastric pouch and creation of separate alimentary and pancreaticobiliary limbs of intestine that delay the mixing of
                   nutrients and pancreaticobiliary secretions thus limiting absorption. Again the preferred approach is laparoscopic.
                   Perioperative complications associated with obesity must be considered in management of bariatric patients. In-
                   creased risk of thromboembolic disease and wound infection warrants prophylaxis. OSA and hypercapnia warrant
                   postop monitoring.

                                                                                           Esophagus

                                                                                               Staple line

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                                                                 Stomach,
                                                                 lesser
                                                                 curvature

                                                                                               Pancreas

                               Figure 12.5-13. Sleeve gastrectomy.

===== PAGE 1352 =====
1352   c h a p t e r 12.5   Pediatric General Surgery

                                                    Gastroesophageal                                Gastrojejunostomy
                                                    junction

                                                                                                                    Stomach

                                                                                                                    Jejunojejunostomy

                                               Figure 12.5-14. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.

                                   Variant procedures or approaches: A number of emerging endoscopic bariatric technologies aim to reduce
                                   the morbidity and mortality of existing techniques. Intragastric balloons and duodenal sleeves are promising but
                                   investigational at this time.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Pediatric obesity (BMI > 50 or BMI > 45 with comorbid conditions). Major comorbidities
                                   include OSA, Type II diabetes, pseudotumor cerebri.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                  Sleeve Gastrectomy/Gastric
                                                                         Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass                 Band
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Position                             Supine on bariatric OR table with legs   <=
                                                                         separated

                                    Incision                             5 laparoscopic ports                     4 laparoscopic ports

                                    Special Instrumentation              Long laparoscopic ports                  <=

                                    Unique Considerations                DVT prophylaxis                          <=

                                    Antibiotics                          Cefoxitin 2 g                            <=

                                    Surgical Time                        2–4 h                                    1–2 h

                                    EBL                                  5–50 mL                                  5–50 mL

                                    Postop Care                          Apnea monitoring                         <=

                                                                         ± UGI to eval for leak

                                    Mortality                            <1%                                      <0.5%

===== PAGE 1353 =====
Pediatric Bariatric Surgery      1353

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                     Sleeve Gastrectomy/Gastric
                                                            Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass                 Band

                     Morbidity                              ↓ PaO2, ↑ PaCO2                          <=

                                                            DVT

                                                            PE

                                                            Anastomotic leak

                     Pain score                             5–6                                      4–5

                     Age range                              Adolescents

                     Male:Female                            1:1

                     Incidence                              1:6

                     Etiology                               Diet and sedentary lifestyle

                     Associated conditions                  Obstructive sleep apnea, hypertension,
                                                            diabetes, joint disease, depression

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Morbid obesity, with a BMI > 40%, is associated with multiple comorbidities, including OSA, HTN, Type II diabetes,
                   fatty liver disease, and in extreme cases, pulmonary hypertension. A multidisciplinary evaluation must be performed
                   prior to scheduling surgery, and a thorough preop evaluation is warranted, including review of medications, associ-
                   ated comorbidities, review of previous anesthetics, airway examination, and discussion of perioperative anesthesia
                   plan. Also include a review of any dieting strategies, especially medications taken for weight loss, as these may result
                   in decreased response to vasopressors intraop. Patients with obesity may present challenges in iv placement, and
                   airway management. Postop pain management starts in the preop period with instruction in use of the incentive
                   spirometer, visual analogue scale, and PCA if appropriate. A bariatric bed must be ordered preop.
                   Respiratory: Adipose tissue is metabolically active, leading to ↑ O2 consumption and increased work of breathing.
                   Increased mass of the thoracic wall → ↑ resistance, ↓ compliance, and a restrictive breathing pattern. In addition, ↑
                   abdominal pressure → atelectasis and ↑ closing volume. Obese patients also frequently suffer from OSA. Adolescent
                   patients may have an increased response to hypoxia and relatively decreased response to hypercapnea. With increasing
                   age, sensitivity to increased levels of CO2 is diminished, and PaCO2 rises further. These changes predispose the obese

                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                   patient to hypoventilation, hypoxemia, and hypercarbia. In addition, changes to the airway related to increased adipos-
                   ity of face and neck may make mask ventilation and intubation difficult. Closely review previous anesthetic records.
                   Nighttime hypoxemia and hypercarbia are frequently seen in obese patients. A sleep study helps to document sever-
                   ity of apneic episodes. Number and severity of apnea and hypopnea episodes (apnea: > 10 s of no airflow; hypopnea:
                   > 50% reduction of airflow, associated with ↓ O2 sat > 4%). Symptoms include snoring, daytime sleepiness, headaches,
                   and difficulty concentrating. Treatment is usually a BIPAP mask. Close monitoring is needed in the postop period, as
                   administration of narcotics may exacerbate symptoms, leading to further hypoxemia and hypercarbia.
                   Tests: CXR, baseline O2 sat, sleep study, documenting hypoxemia while asleep
                   Cardiovascular: Because cardiac output rises proportionately with weight, obesity in both children and adults is
                   frequently associated with hypertension and possibly LVH. Even normotensive patients have increased preload and
                   afterload, ↑ PAP, and elevated left and right heart stroke volume. Symptoms of pulmonary HTN (dyspnea on exer-
                   tion, fatigue, syncope, baseline hypoxemia) should be elicited and ECG obtained in symptomatic patients.
                   Tests: ECG, ECHO if indicated
                   Gastrointestinal: Obese patients have higher intraabdominal pressures and may be at increased risk of aspira-
                   tion. Studies have shown that acidity and volume do not statistically differ from nonobese patients. The presence

===== PAGE 1354 =====
1354   c h a p t e r 12.5     Pediatric General Surgery

                                   of diabetes or gastroparesis increases risk of aspiration. Fatty liver disease may be present, frequently indicated by
                                   a rise in ALT. Increased volume of distribution may necessitate higher initial doses of anesthetic induction agents,
                                   especially lipid soluble agents such as propofol.
                                   Tests: Chem 23
                                   Renal: Increased RBF and GFR may necessitate increased doses of renally cleared medications.
                                   Premedication: Premedication should be used with caution, as obese patients are at increased risk of hypoventila-
                                   tion and hypoxemia. Midazolam 1–2 mg iv may be given if needed, with constant monitoring. Presurgery medica-
                                   tions are continued, with the exception of ACE inhibitors, which are held the night prior to surgery, to minimize risk
                                   of intraop hypotension.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE

                                   Induction                  Assuming a reassuring airway examination and history, a rapid sequence induction with
                                                              preoxygenation and cricoid pressure, followed by propofol 2–2.5 mg/kg (TBW) and suc-
                                                              cinylcholine 1 mg/kg TBW is the safest way to secure the airway. If history of difficult
                                                              intubation exits, or examination suggestive of difficult airway, consider awake FOI, using
                                                              topical anesthesia, midazolam iv, and remifentanil infusion (0.05 to 1 mcg/kg/min) or dex-
                                                              medetomidine infusion (0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/h). Positioning should include the use of a ramp
                                                              to facilitate neck extension. This allows alignment of laryngeal, pharyngeal, and oral axes
                                                              and promotes optimal visualization of the airway with laryngoscopy.

                                   Maintenance                Propofol 200 mcg/kg/min combined with low-dose sevoflurane or desflurane; rocuronium
                                                              for NMB (after recovery of NM function following succinylcholine). Use opioids cautious-
                                                              ly, as may lead to increased sedation on awakening. Suggest loading with hydromorphone
                                                              10 mcg/kg TBW, followed by remifentanil infusion 0.5–1 mcg/kg/min. Acetaminophen 10
                                                              mg/kg iv, and ketorolac 0.5 mg/kg iv may reduce opioid requirement.

                                   Emergence                  Extubate awake. NG tube suction prior to extubation. Caution in immediate postop period,
                                                              as patient may have ↓ ventilatory drive with ↓ responsiveness to hypoxemia and hypercar-
                                                              bia. Cautiously titrate opioids.
                                                              Postop pain control—PCA may be used, with cautious dosing regimens (e.g., hydromor-
                                                              phone—no basal rate, 1–2 mcg/kg bolus dose). Ketorolac 0.5 mg iv q 6 may be used with cau-
                                                              tion, after checking renal function. Acetaminophen 10 mg/kg iv q 6 h should be continued
                                                              postop. Postop monitoring is essential. Supplemental O2 may be necessary via nasal cannula.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Hypoxia, hypercarbia, apnea, air-         Close monitoring, supplemental O2 if needed, rela-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                              way obstruction                           tively small frequent opioid dosing
                                                              Pain control challenging due to re-       Multimodal analgesia, judicious use of opioids, use
                                                              spiratory risk factors                    of adjuvants, including acetaminophen, ketorolac,
                                                              Difficult postop ambulation               lorazepam (see Appendix E)
                                                              DVT                                       Assistance with ambulation, including physical,
                                                              PE                                        occupational therapy—additional doses of opioid
                                                                                                        should be utilized around ambulation sessions
                                                                                                        DVT and PE prevention—ambulation, compression
                                                                                                        stockings while in bed, Lovenox®—discuss with sur-
                                                                                                        gical team

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Alqahtani AR, Antonisamy B, Alamri H, Elahmedi M, Zimmerman VA: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in 108 obese
                                        children and adolescents aged 5 to 21 years. Ann Surg 2012; 256(2):266–73.
                                     2. Hassink S: Clinical Guide to Pediatric Weight Management and Obesity. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007.

===== PAGE 1355 =====
Pediatric Bariatric Surgery           1355

                     3. Lee DY, Guend H, Park K, et al: Outcomes of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass versus laparoscopic adjustable gastric
                        banding in adolescents. Obesity Surg 2012; 22(12):1859–64.
                     4. Li Y, Raychowdhury S, Tedders SH, Lyn R, Lòpez-De Fede A, Zhang J: Association between increased BMI and severe school
                        absenteeism among US children and adolescents: findings from a national survey 2005–2008. Inter Obesity 2012; 36(4):517–23.
                     5. Moreno M, Furtner F, Rivara FP: Adolescent bariatric surgery. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2012; 266(8):784.
                     6. Nijhawan S, Martinez T, Wittgrove AC: Laparoscopic gastric bypass for the adolescent patient: long-term results. Obesity
                        Surg 2012; 22(9):1445–9.
                     7. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM: Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index among US children and
                        adolescents, 1999–2010. JAMA 2012; 307(5):483–90.
                     8. Picot J, Jones J, Colquitt JL, et al: The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of bariatric (weight loss) surgery for obesity:
                        a systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess 2009; 13(41):1–190, 215–357.
                     9. Samuels PF: Anesthesia for adolescent bariatric surgery. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2006; 44(1):17–31.
                    10. Trigueros L, Pena S, Ubidos AF, et al: Food ingredients as anti-obesity agents: a review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2013; 53:
                        929–42.

                                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery

===== PAGE 1356 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.6 Pediatric
                                           Urology

                                           surgeons
                                           Philip Barbosa, MD
                                           Linda M. Dairiki Shortliffe, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Imad M. Yamout, MD
                                           Anita Honkanen, MD

===== PAGE 1358 =====
Kidney and Upper Urinary Tract Operations
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: With the increase in perinatal ultrasonographic detection of renal masses and hydronephrosis, the
                                   number of pediatric kidney and upper urinary tract surgeries has increased significantly in the past two decades. Chil-
                                   dren come to surgery at an earlier age, leading to a lower incidence of renal dysfunction.
                                   Nephrectomy: Although the main indications for nephrectomy in adults are renal cell carcinoma or benign renal
                                   tumors, tumor nephrectomy is uncommon in children (with the exception of Wilms’ tumors) and is performed to
                                   remove poorly or nonfunctioning kidneys secondary to congenital anomalies such as ureteropelvic junction (UPJ)
                                    obstruction or end-stage reflux nephropathy. Multicystic dysplastic kidneys (MCDK) were removed in the past,
                                    but currently are only removed if they become symptomatic or increase in size as they have a benign course. Unlike
                                    adults, who require a more painful intercostal or rib incision because of their general muscular flexibility, excellent
                                    renal exposure in children is obtained through a subcostal incision. As in the adult population, laparoscopic nephrec-
                                    tomy and renal surgery are becoming more common.
                                   When a flank/subcostal incision is used, careful positioning of the patient is crucial. Failure to properly stabilize and se-
                                   cure the patient to the OR table can cause devastating consequences; therefore, efforts must be coordinated to properly
                                   position the patient. A rolled sheet or gel pad should be positioned beneath the dependent axilla, elevating the thorax to
                                   avoid brachial plexus neuropraxia. The dependent lower extremity is flexed at the hip and knee, while the overlying leg
                                   is kept straight. Padding is placed between the knees. In older children, in this lateral flank position, the kidney rest at
                                   the break of the table may be elevated to increase the distance between the rib and iliac crest, thus increasing exposure
                                   of the kidney. Attention is needed by the anesthesiologist during positioning, including care of the ETT, attention to
                                   pressure points, application of wide tape to secure patient safely, and repositioning of leads. After the patient is posi-
                                   tioned, a transverse incision is made below the 12th rib. The peritoneum is reflected, and surgery remains retroperi-
                                   toneal; the ureter is dissected to the hilum, and the vessels are ligated. The kidney is excised, and the wound is closed.
                                   The lumbodorsal incision (incision parallel to the paraspinous muscle group) is performed with the patient in the prone
                                   or lateral position. This has an advantage of being a muscle-splitting, rather than a muscle-cutting, incision and, as such,
                                   is associated with less postoperative pain and fewer incisional hernias. Abdominal padding may be added to raise the
                                   lumbodorsal area, and care should be taken to ensure complete pulmonary expansion in this position.
                                   Most often in either the flank or lumbodorsal positioning, a urethral catheter is positioned for dependent drainage
                                   with care taken to avoid obstructing the tubing. In this way, the anesthesiologist may measure urinary output, though
                                   urinary extravasation may occur within the surgical site depending on the operation.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: MCDK; Wilms’ tumor; nonfunctioning kidney; dysplastic kidney; ureteropelvic junction (UPJ)
                                   obstruction; partial nephrectomy of in duplicated collecting systems with obstructive ectopic uretere or ureterocele.
                                   Partial nephrectomy: Partial nephrectomies are common in children and are usually performed for a partially or
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   nonfunctioning upper pole of a duplicated system. Ectopic ureters and ureteroceles are frequently the cause of loss
                                   of function. Again, these can be approached through either a lumbodorsal or a flank incision. If the upper pole is
                                   obstructed but functional, a pyeloureterostomy from the upper pole ureter to the pelvis of the lower pole may be
                                   performed to salvage as much functioning parenchyma as possible. Partial nephrectomies may be performed for
                                   bilateral Wilms’ tumor or other renal masses through a chevron or midline incision. An increasing number of partial
                                   nephrectomies are performed in a laparoscopic fashion.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nonfunctioning upper pole of a duplex system; ureterocele; ectopic ureter; bilateral Wilms’
                                   tumor; angiomyolipoma (more common in patients with tuberous sclerosis)
                                   Nephroureterectomy: Nephroureterectomy often is performed for the upper pole of a duplex system that is
                                   obstructed due to an ureterocele or ectopic ureter. After the nephrectomy/partial nephrectomy is performed through
                                    a dorsal lumbotomy or flank approach, the ureter is dissected as low as possible (usually to the level of the iliac ves-
                                    sels). The ureteral stump is left open if there is no vesicoureteral reflux and tied off if there is reflux. If indicated, distal
                                    ureterectomy can be performed via a second lower abdominal incision (typically a Pfannenstiel incision). If the initial
                                    incision was done in the prone position, the patient may need to be repositioned supine.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nonfunctioning upper pole of a duplex system; ureterocele; ectopic ureter

                            1358

===== PAGE 1359 =====
Figure 12.6-1. Anatomy for nephrectomy. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al: Surgery: Scientific Principles and
                               Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   Pyeloplasty: Fetal hydronephrosis is detected in approximately 1 in every 300 pregnancies. Pyeloplasty to correct
                   congenital obstruction of the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) is therefore one of the most common pediatric upper uri-
                   nary tract surgical procedures. The hydronephrotic kidney usually is exposed through either a dorsal lumbotomy or a
                   subcostal flank incision. The patient may be in a prone or modified lateral decubitus position (see details related to sub-
                   costal or lumbodorsal incision above). In most instances, the operation is performed entirely retroperitoneally with ex-
                   posure of the upper ureter and renal pelvis. The abnormal UPJ is excised, followed by an end-to-end anastomosis (dis-
                   membered pyeloplasty or Anderson-Hynes pyeloplasty). If the renal pelvis is intrarenal and dependent drainage is
                   not possible via a conventional pyeloplasty, an ureterocalicostomy may be performed by r emoving an area of thin renal
                   parenchyma and anastomosing the ureter to a lower pole calyx. At the conclusion of the procedure, a perirenal Penrose
                   drain typically is placed near the anastomosis, and, depending on surgeon preference, a ureteral stent or nephrostomy
                   tube may be used. A urethral catheter may or may not be left after the procedure. Recently, more of these procedures
                   have been performed robotically or laparoscopically. A major difference between these approaches is that a robotic ap-

                                                                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery
                   proach requires a intraperitoneal approach, while laparoscopic or open approaches are usually extra or retroperitoneal.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fetal hydronephrosis 2° UPJ obstruction; hydronephrosis with a decrease in kidney func-
                   tion and/or flank pain
                   Transureteroureterostomy (TUU): This procedure, in which a ureter is anastomosed to the contralateral ureter, is
                   used when there is problematic drainage of the distal ureter into the bladder. It is sometimes required to salvage a failed
                   reimplantation or to transform a conduit-type diversion to an orthotopic neobladder or augmented native bladder. This
                   technique can also be used to provide drainage in ureteral trauma. A midline or Pfannenstiel incision is used, and the
                   peritoneum is entered. The ureters are dissected, and the affected ureter is retroperitonealized and brought to the contra-
                   lateral side anterior to the great vessels. It is anastomosed to the contralateral ureter end-to-side with absorbable suture.
                   If required, the recipient ureter is then reimplanted into the neobladder or augmented bladder.
                   In routine open surgery of the kidney and renal pelvis, use of intraoperative local anesthesia (infiltration of local anesthetic
                   in the surgical incision) and higher dosage of nonoploid pain medications (acetaminophen) appear to decrease pain in-
                   tensity during the first postoperative day. Continuous epidural or caudal catheters can be effective for postoperative pain
                   management but may result in urinary retention.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Failed ureteral reimplant; undiversion; distal ureteral trauma

                                                                                                                                                       1359

===== PAGE 1360 =====
1360   c h a p t e r 12.6        Pediatric Urology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                 Nephrectomy/Pyeloplasty           Nephroureterectomy                    TUU

                                    Position                     Flank/prone                       Supine/flank                          Supine

                                    Incision                     Dorsal lumbotomy; subcostal;      Subcostal flank 2nd incision:         Midline or Pfannenstiel
                                                                 flank; midline                    Pfannenstiel

                                    Antibiotics                  Gentamicin 1.7 mg/kg iv           ⇐                                     ⇐

                                    Surgical time                2.5 h                             3 h (repositioning may be required) ⇐

                                    EBL                          Minimal; if partial nephrectomy, Minimal                                ⇐
                                                                 300 mL

                                    Mortality                    < 1%                              ⇐                                     ⇐

                                    Morbidity                    Bleeding: < 5%                    ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                 Infection: < 5%                   ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                 Ileus: < 5%                       ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                                                                                         Urinary fistula : < 5%

                                    Pain score                   Flank: 10                         10                                    10
                                                                 Lumbotomy: 5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                 Ureteroceles              MCDK*           UPJ Obstruction            Wilms’ Tumor

                                    Age range                    Pediatric                 Neonates        Neonates, children         Children (average, 4 yr)

                                    Male:Female                  1:4                       ⇐               M>F                        M < F in the United States

                                    Incidence                    1:2000                    ⇐               1:500 birth                1:100,000

                                    Etiology                     Congenital                ⇐               ⇐                          Genetic: WT1 gene

                                    Associated                   UPJ; VUR; duplicated      ⇐               VUR**; renal               Hemihypertrophy, aniridia, HTN,
                                      conditions                 collecting system                         insufficiency              Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome

                                    *MCDK = multicystic dysplastic kidney
                                    **VUR = vesicoureteral reflux

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Kelalis PP, Maizels M, Das S, et al: Kidney reconstruction. In: Hinman F Jr, ed. Atlas of Pediatric Urologic Surgery. WB Saunders,
                                        Philadelphia: 1994, 112–17, 123–43.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                     2. Marshall FF, Massad C, Hensle TW, et al: Kidney excision. In: Hinman F Jr, ed. Atlas of Pediatric Urologic Surgery. WB Saunders,
                                        Philadelphia: 1994, 155–88.
                                     3. Richey ML: Pediatric urologic oncology. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, et al, eds. Adult and Pediatric Urology,
                                        Vol 3, 4th edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2002, 2623–46.
                                     4. Ritchy ML: Pediatric urologic oncology. In: Walsh PC, Retik AB, Vaughn ED, et al, eds. Campbell’s Urology, 8th edition.
                                        WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2002, 2649–94.
                                     5. Shaffer BS: Pearls and perils of patient positioning. AUA Update Series 1995; 14:178–83.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   In infants and children, most upper urinary tract surgical procedures are performed to preserve or restore renal
                                   function. Patients may present with renal function that varies from minimally abnormal, requiring little or no modi-
                                   fication of anesthetic plan, to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) with its associated abnormalities, including hypopro-
                                   teinemia, chronic anemia, and serum electrolyte disturbances. A careful preop workup is required to determine the
                                   presence or absence of abnormal physiologic factors that will affect anesthesia management. For most cases, the
                                   workup will have been performed by the patient’s physicians before surgery and will provide the rationale for the
                                   surgical procedure. Such nonspecific findings as anorexia, headache, nausea, fatigue, alterations in urine output, and
                                   the presence of edema will alert the clinician to the likelihood of renal failure.

===== PAGE 1361 =====
Kidney and Upper Urinary Tract Operations           1361

                   Renal abnormalities often are present as one component of a congenital malformation syndrome (e.g., polycystic
                   kidneys, cerebrohepatorenal syndrome). In formulating the anesthetic plan, drugs eliminated by the kidney (e.g.,
                   pancuronium, meperidine) should be avoided.

                    Respiratory             An evaluation of pulmonary function, including auscultation of the lungs, may indicate the
                                            presence of pulmonary edema (uremic lung) or a pleural effusion.
                                            Tests: ABG; CXR; pulse oximetry

                    Cardiovascular          HTN is commonly seen in these patients, who may be taking antihypertensive medications
                                            and diuretics. In severe cases, CHF or pulmonary edema may be present, necessitating the use
                                            of cardioactive drugs and diuretics to optimize the patient’s clinical condition before surgery.
                                            Tests: ABG; CXR; digitalis level; electrolytes

                    Renal                   In cases requiring unilateral urinary tract surgery, the opposite kidney is usually normal.
                                            In the presence of renal insufficiency, a detailed evaluation of renal function is essential.
                                            Chronic metabolic acidosis may be present 2° poor kidney function, electrolyte abnormali-
                                            ties (↑ K+, ↓ Ca++, ↑ or ↓ Na), hypovolemia, hypervolemia, and/or poor tissue perfusion.
                                            Children with ESRD will have been dialyzed before surgery. Preop K+ < 6 mEq/L is usually
                                            safe. These patients may have an AV fistula, which must be protected during surgery (pad-
                                            ded, no BP cuff ). More commonly, a double-lumen central venous catheter will have been
                                            placed for hemodialysis (e.g., permacath).
                                            Tests: UA; UO; serum electrolytes; BUN; Cr; total protein; A/G ratio; ABG

                    Gastrointestinal        Renal failure is associated with increased incidence of delayed gastric emptying and gastro-
                                            esophageal reflux. Modified rapid sequence induction should be considered.

                    Hematologic             Anemia, bone marrow depression, and coagulopathies are common in patients with poor
                                            renal function, particularly platelet dysfunction. An Hct of 20–23% is not uncommon.
                                            Tests: Hb/Hct, PT/PTT; Plt count

                    Medications             Patients with ESRD will be taking many medications, which may influence the anesthetic
                                            plan. For example, chronic steroid therapy → Cushing facies, glycosuria; therefore, 3
                                            blood sugar and 3 airway. Patients taking digitalis or diuretics → ↓ K+ → arrhythmias.
                                            Aminoglycosides → prolongation of neuromuscular blockade. If possible, avoid renal toxic
                                            drugs in patients with renal insufficiency (e.g., NSAIDs, aminoglycosides).

                    Premedication           Standard preop medication if renal function is normal (see p. D-1). Patients with ESRD
                                            may have increased sensitivity to sedatives; doses should be titrated carefully to effect.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural. (Platelet dysfunction should be assumed in ESRD and the risk/benefit of

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                   epidural placement carefully weighed.) Warm OR to 70–75°F; use warming pad on OR table and/or forced-air warming.

                    Induction               Mask induction is preferable, unless iv is already in place. If an indwelling permacath is to
                                            be accessed, heparin should be aspirated from the lumen before use. Routine use of dialysis
                                            catheters is discouraged due to need for strict sterile technique in handling of the catheter
                                            to avoid line infection. Succinylcholine should not be used in renal failure patients due to
                                            risk of K+ release in borderline hyperkalemic patients. In the presence of renal insufficiency,
                                            antibiotics (e.g., aminoglycosides) may interfere with the metabolism of muscle relaxants
                                            and prolong their effect and may further compromise renal function. Tracheal intubation,
                                            facilitated by an NMR (e.g., rocuronium 0.6–1 mg/kg or cisatracurium 0.2–0.3 mg/kg)
                                            is appropriate in patients with renal insufficiency. In appropriate patients (normal coags
                                            and no platelet dysfunction), epidural anesthesia with bupivacaine (see p. E-6) may reduce
                                            anesthetic requirements and provide postop analgesia (NB: local anesthetic clearance may
                                            be impaired in ESRD). Maintain muscle relaxation with rocuronium or cisatracurium.

                    Maintenance             Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3). Moderate hyperventilation may be beneficial
                                            (→ ↓ K+ + ↑ pH).

===== PAGE 1362 =====
1362   c h a p t e r 12.6   Pediatric Urology

                                   Emergence                Reverse neuromuscular blockade with neostigmine and glycopyrrolate or atropine (see p. D-3).

                                   Blood and fluid          IV × 1 in upper extremities              Usually minimal blood loss; however, renal surgery
                                      requirements          NS @ (maintenance):                      may be associated with ↑ blood loss. Transfuse with
                                                               4 mL/kg/h (1–10 kg)                   whole blood or PRBCs as needed to maintain an
                                                               + 2 mL/kg/h (11–20 kg)                adequate Hct, based on physiologic response (usually
                                                               + 1 mL/kg/h (> 20 kg)                 25–30%). If K+ is high and patient has ESRD use fresh-
                                                                                                     est PRBC or washed PRBC to minimize the K+ load.
                                                                                                     Minimal iv flush should be administered in the pres-
                                                                                                     ence of oliguric renal insufficiency. Fluids in excess
                                                                                                     can lead to pulmonary edema especially in an aneuric
                                                                                                     patient. Avoid K+ containing crystalloid infusions.

                                   Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                                            ± Arterial line                          Consider placing an arterial line in patients with sig-
                                                                                                     nificant renal failure particularly for those patients
                                                                                                     with poorly controlled HTN as they may exhibit
                                                                                                     marked hypotension or BP variability after induc-
                                                                                                     tion; 3 serum electrolytes and ABG frequently.

                                   Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                                            3 eyes                                   3 eyes frequently if prone or flank positions are used.

                                   Complications            Peripheral nerve injury
                                                            Eye trauma
                                                            Hemorrhage
                                                            Dysrhythmia
                                                            Indigo carmine administration may
                                                            lead to ↑ BP, ↓ HR, ↓ BP, bronchospasm

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications            Hypovolemia
                                                            Anemia
                                                            Hypothermia
                                                            Electrolyte abnormalities
                                                            Coagulopathy
                                                            Metabolic/respiratory acidosis

                                   Pain                     Acetaminophen (see p. E-4).              In renal failure, reduce analgesic doses by 50% to
                                     management                                                      minimize cumulative effects.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            Narcotics by epidural catheter           Note: morphine-6-glucuronide is renally excreted
                                                            (see p. E-6) or PCA (see p. E-4)         and accumulates in patients with renal failure.
                                                                                                     It leads to increased analgesia. Morphine-3-
                                                                                                     glucuronide is antanalgesic and likewise increases
                                                                                                     in patients with ESRD. It is therefore preferred to
                                                                                                     use hydromorphone. For patients without renal fail-
                                                                                                     ure, epidural or caudal catheters can be effective for
                                                                                                     postoperative pain management but may result in
                                                                                                     urinary retention. Peripheral nerve blockade (e.g.,
                                                                                                     transversus abdominus block, TAP), ilioinguinal,
                                                                                                     and iliohypogastric blocks avoid this issue. Single-
                                                                                                     shot caudal may also be used for minor procedures.
                                                                                                     (See discussion in surgical section on page 1366.)

                                   Tests                    As indicated.

===== PAGE 1363 =====
Transurethral Procedures          1363

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Change KSK, Zhong MZ, Davis RF: Indigo carmine inhibits endothelium dependent and independent vasodilatation. HTN
                        1996; 27:228–34.
                     2. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracis, urologic and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 745–86.
                     3. Hobai IA: Atrioventricular block induced by indigo carmine. Can J Anesth 2008; 55(10):717–8.
                     4. Landsman IS, Ziegler LN, Deshpande JK: Anesthesia for pediatric urologic procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB
                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 740–57.
                     5. Lee WJ, Jang HS: Cardiac arrest from intravenous indigo carmine during laparoscopic surgery. A case report. Korean J
                        Anesthesiol 2012; 62(1):87–90.
                     6. Nguyen AC, Kost E, Farmstad M: Indigo carmine-induced severe hypotension. Anesth Analg 1998; 27(5):1194–5.

                   Transurethral Procedures
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Transurethral procedures are not as common in children as they are in adults; however, the in-
                   strumentation, general principles, and considerations are similar. The most common pediatric endoscopic pro-
                   cedures are cystoscopy and vaginoscopy, primarily as diagnostic procedures; removal of foreign bodies (FBs)
                   including indwelling ureteral stents; transurethral incision of urethral stricture, for congenital lesions or com-
                   plications of urethral surgery; transurethral incision of posterior urethral valves (PUV); transurethral inci-
                   sion of ureterocele; subureteric injection for vesicoureteral reflux; and endoscopic injection for urinary
                   incontinence.
                   The positioning and techniques are identical to those in the adult. Careful attention to positioning is required when
                   the pediatric patient is placed in the lithotomy position. For smaller children, this involves the frog leg position at
                   the distal end of the bed rather than the stirrups. The patient can remain supine if a flexible cystoscope is used. The
                   most frequent neurological complication from lithotomy position may be injury to the common peroneal nerve →
                   foot drop and sensory deficit. After the patient is positioned, a lubricated cystoscope or resectoscope (7–18 Fr) is
                   introduced through the urethra. In infants, posterior urethral valves may be resected using a small cutting electrode
                   or a laser, whereas a resectoscope is used in older children. With the advent of prenatal ultrasonography, posterior
                   urethral valves (hydronephrosis and azotemia) often are resected in the neonatal period.
                   Foreign bodies or stones are removed using forceps, after crushing or pulverization with a laser, if necessary. Eye pro-
                   tection should be worn by all operating room staff if a laser is used. Occasionally, ureteral stents are placed/removed
                   (after renal transplants, for instance) and an intraoperative retrograde pyelogram is performed to evaluate the upper
                   tract collection system. During cystoscopy, localization of the ureteral orifices may be difficult due to inflammation,

                                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                   prior bladder surgery, or congenital ectopia. The anesthesiologist may be asked to administer iv indigo carmine,
                   which will filter through the kidneys and produce blue urine to assist with locating the ureteral orifices. This has
                   potential effects of ↑ BP by increasing afterload and causing reflex bradycardia.
                   Because most endoscopic procedures are short and the prostate and large resections are not involved, fluid absorp-
                   tion toxicity is rare, as opposed to that seen during “TURP syndrome.” The operative team, however, must still be
                   aware of the metabolic consequences of fluid reabsorption, as this can also occur through catastrophic ureteral or
                   bladder perforation during endoscopic procedures in addition to the routine water reabsorption through venous
                   channels. If a long-term indwelling uretheral catheter was present before surgery, adequate antibiotic treatment and
                   culture is imperative as the urine must be considered infected.
                   For pain control aside from opioids in the immediate postoperative period, lidocaine gel may be injected transure-
                   thrally at the completion of the transurethral procedure to avoid postoperative urethral irritation. Some surgeons
                   administer phenazopyridine (Pyridium) via nasogastric tube to decrease catheter irritation. Finally, if a catheter is
                   left, an antimuscarinic may be given to decrease bladder spasms (Ditropan).

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Intravesical foreign body; bladder calculus; bladder outlet obstruction; urethral stricture;
                   ureterocele; hematuria; urethral/vaginal mass; posterior urethral valves, urogenital sinus

===== PAGE 1364 =====
1364   c h a p t e r 12.6    Pediatric Urology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Lithotomy

                                    Incision                 None

                                    Special                  Cystoscope, resectoscope, catheters, stents, video camera unit, laser (optional)
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Use of cautery, fluoroscopy, PUV (prematurity or azotemia), and possible fluid reabsorption.
                                      considerations         Children with an obstructing ureterocele and pyelonephrosis may be at risk for urosepsis and
                                                             should have close hemodynamic monitoring

                                    Antibiotics              If infected urine preop, gentamicin 1.7 mg/kg iv

                                    Surgical time            Cystoscopy: 10 min
                                                             Transurethral procedure: 1 h

                                    EBL                      Minimal

                                    Postop care              PACU; basic catheter management, with oral Pyridium in the PACU for bladder analgesia

                                    Mortality                < 1%

                                    Morbidity                Bleeding
                                                             Urethral stricture
                                                             Infection
                                                             Overdistention in augmented bladder

                                    Pain score               2

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               0–18 yr

                                    Male:Female             Posterior urethral valves, strictures: male only
                                                            Ureterocele 1:6
                                                            Vesicoureteral reflux 1:4

                                    Incidence               1/1000–1/5000

                                    Etiology                Posterior urethral valves; vesicoureteral reflux; intravesical FB; bladder calculus; bladder outlet
                                                            obstruction; urethral stricture; ureterocele

                                    Associated              Spina bifida; paraplegia/quadriplegia; repeat cystoscopies; strictures; bladder stones; latex
                                      conditions            allergy
        Pediatric Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Transurethral Procedures, Open Bladder Procedures, Penile Surgery, Genital
                                   Procedures, p. 1372.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Strand WR, Bloom DA: Pediatric endourology. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, et al, eds. Adult and Pediatric
                                        Urology, Vol 3, 4th edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2002, 2719–28.
                                     2. Warner MA: Lower extremity neuropathies associated with lithotomy positions. Anesthesiology 2000; 93:938–42.

===== PAGE 1365 =====
Open Bladder Operations         1365

                   Open Bladder Operations
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Open bladder operations commonly performed on children include ureteral reimplantation for cor-
                   rection of vesicoureteral reflux, obstructive megaureters, or ureterocele; vesicostomy (Blocksom); and bladder
                   neck operations.
                   Ureteral reimplantation: Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is one of the most common abnormalities of the urinary
                   tract in children and is present in about 25–50% of those who have UTI. Although VUR resolves spontaneously in
                   many children, there are a number of indications for correction of VUR. These include high-grade VUR, progressive
                   VUR and renal scarring, failure to resolve within several years, other bladder surgery, breakthrough UTIs, and poor
                   medical compliance.
                   Ureteral reimplantations can be performed using different approaches to the bladder (e.g., extravesical, intravesical,
                   or a combined approach); however, these different approaches require a similar exposure and abdominal incision.
                   In general, these are extraperitoneal rather than intraperitoneal operations. Initially, cystoscopy may be performed
                   to plan a potentially complex reimplantation (e.g., duplex systems, ectopia, or periureteral diverticula). A lower
                   abdominal suprapubic (Pfannenstiel) incision (Fig. 12.6-2) is usually made, the fascia is opened (may either be muscle
                    cutting or splitting incision; in the latter, the fascia may be opened in the vertical midline), and the bladder is exposed.
                    Sufficient muscle relaxation is required to enable the surgeon to place a self-retaining retractor to expose the bladder.
                    The anesthesiologist also may be asked to limit N2O to decrease the amount of peritoneal contents bulging toward
                   the bladder surgical field. The bladder is then opened (intravesical approach), and the ureter(s) is (are) reimplanted.
                   Alternatively, the bladder is mobilized to expose the posterolateral ureter, which is then reimplanted (extravesical ap-
                   proach). When required, ureteral stents are brought to the abdominal skin through the bladder wall. A Penrose drain
                   may be left in place, which is either brought through the incision or through a separate skin puncture.
                   Obstructive megaureters and ureteroceles are other conditions that may require ureteral reimplantation. The
                   abdominal exposure and indications do not differ significantly from ureteral reimplantation for VUR; however,

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery

                               Figure 12.6-2. A Pfannenstiel’s incision in Langer’s lines is a low transverse incision
                               that provides good access to the bladder and other pelvic organs and good cosmesis.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Hinman F: Atlas of Pediatric Urologic Surgery, 2nd
                               edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1994.)

===== PAGE 1366 =====
1366   c h a p t e r 12.6    Pediatric Urology

                                   tailoring of the ureter by reducing its caliber and excising redundant tissue or plicating it may be necessary. A proce-
                                   dure on the bladder neck also may be required if an ureterocele extends distally through the bladder outlet.
                                   Regional anesthesia techniques—specifically caudal or epidural analgesia—have gained popularity for these pro-
                                   cedures. They have been shown to decrease postoperative pain medication requirements. However, as the patient
                                   usually leaves the hospital within 48 h, long-term epidural or caudal anesthesia is usually not required. As there may
                                   be increased risk of urinary retention following neuraxial anesthesia, it is often easier to leave a urethral catheter
                                   in place postoperatively. The diagnosis of urinary retention may be difficult to make following bladder surgery, and
                                   catheterization trauma may occur. An indwelling catheter may also cause increased discomfort from bladder spasms
                                   and irritation. Intravesical lidocaine gel may alleviate some bladder irritation. Without a catheter, children usually
                                   void spontaneously within 6–9 h after surgery. For these reasons, the surgeon’s preference on whether an indwelling
                                   urethral or urethral catheter is planned at the conclusion of the procedure should be elicited at the beginning of the
                                   case and considered in the selection of a regional block.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: VUR; obstructive megaureter; ureterocele
                                   Vesicostomy: Infants and very young children may require bladder drainage until definitive bladder or urethral
                                   surgery. A vesicostomy may be performed, allowing the urine to flow continuously from a small, lower abdominal
                                   vesicocutaneous fistula. A 2-cm transverse incision is made halfway between the umbilicus and the pubis, and the
                                   bladder is dissected extraperitoneally to expose the dome. The bladder is opened at the dome (urachus) and is anas-
                                   tomosed to abdominal skin with absorbable sutures, creating a small fistula.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Posterior or anterior urethral valves; severe VUR; neurovesical dysfunction; prune belly
                                   syndrome
                                   Bladder neck operations: These procedures usually are required in patients with severe anomalies, such as exstro-
                                   phy, or severe incontinence due to an incompetent bladder neck. These are more complex procedures, with dissec-
                                   tion often difficult. The approach to the bladder is similar to that of ureteral reimplantation, using a lower abdominal
                                   (Pfannenstiel) incision (Fig. 12.6-2). The space of Retzius is dissected bluntly and the anterior bladder wall and pubic
                                   bone are exposed. The bladder is opened and the bladder neck dissected and reconstructed. Various techniques to
                                   tubularize the anterior bladder wall, elongate the urethra, and increase the outlet resistance have been described.
                                   Bilateral ureteral reimplantation and bladder neck suspension can be performed at the same time. One special con-
                                   sideration is latex allergy (see Appendix G).

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Exstrophy/epispadias complex; spina bifida; neurogenic bladder; incontinence; bladder-
                                   neck reconstruction

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Reimplantation                     Vesicostomy                 Bladder Neck

                                    Position                Supine                             ⇐                           ⇐

                                    Incision                Pfannenstiel or low midline        ⇐                           ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            extraperitoneal

                                    Unique                  None                               ⇐                           Latex allergy (see p. G-1)
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             None unless indicated              ⇐                           Gentamicin 1.7 mg/kg iv, slowly

                                    Surgical time           1.5 h                              45 min                      2h

                                    EBL                     Minimal                            →                           200 mL

                                    Postop care             PACU; ± urethral catheter ±        PACU                        Urethral catheter 4–7 d; PACU
                                                            stents. Anticholenergics for blad-                             → ward
                                                            der spasms; belladonna and opioid
                                                            suppositories, if given, must be
                                                            monitored because of the potential
                                                            of oversedation and respiratory
                                                            depression. Older children may
                                                            benefit from epidural anesthesia.

===== PAGE 1367 =====
Bladder Augmentation         1367

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Reimplantation                        Vesicostomy                   Bladder Neck

                     Mortality               < 1%                                  ⇐                             ⇐

                     Morbidity               Infection: < 3%                       ⇐                             ⇐
                                             Bleeding: < 3%                        ⇐                             < 5%
                                             Urinary retention:                    –                             Urinary retention
                                                Unilateral: < 5%
                                                Bilateral: 8–10%
                                             Ureteral obstruction
                                             Persistent reflux                                                   ⇐

                     Pain score              7                                     4                             7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               1 mo–teenage                          ⇐                              ⇐

                     Male:Female             1:4                                   1:1                            ⇐

                     Incidence               1%                                    ⇐                              ⇐

                     Etiology                Unknown                               Congenital                     ⇐

                     Associated              UTI; renal failure                    ⇐                              ⇐
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Transurethral Procedures, Open Bladder Procedures, Penile Surgery, Genital Pro-
                   cedures, p. 1372.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Canning DA, Koo HP, Duckett JW: Anomalies of the bladder and cloaca. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, et al,
                        eds. Adult and Pediatric Urology, Vol 3, 3rd edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1996, 2445–88.
                     2. Dixon Walker R: Vesicoureteral reflux and urinary tract infection in children. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS,
                        et al, eds. Adult and Pediatric Urology, Vol 3, 3rd edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1996, 2459–95.
                     3. King LR: Vesicoureteral reflux, megaureter, and ureteral reimplantation. In: Walsh PC, Retik AB, Stamey TA, et al, eds.
                        Campbell’s Urology, Vol 2, 6th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1992, 1689–1742.
                     4. Merguerian PA, Sulters PA, Tang E, Kaji D, Hang B: Efficacy of continuous epidural analgesia versus single dose caudal
                        analgesia in children after intravesical ureteroneocystostomy. Urol 2004; 172(4pt2):1621–5.

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                     5. Smith GHH, Duckett JW: Urethral lesions in infants and children. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, et al, eds.
                        Adult and Pediatric Urology, Vol 3, 3rd edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1996, 2411–43.
                     6. Wilton NT: Postoperative pain management for pediatric urologic surgery. Urologic Clin North Am 1995; 22(1):189–201.

                   Bladder Augmentation
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A variety of pathologies may be associated with neurogenic bladder, including spina bifida, cerebral
                   palsy, and spinal cord injury. Failure of bladder storage and/or compliance may cause urinary incontinence or high
                   voiding pressures leading to upper tract deterioration. In such cases, and in cases where infectious or fibrotic pro-
                   cesses have caused a reduction in bladder capacity, the patient may be a candidate for bladder augmentation with
                   native intestine, colon, stomach, or ureter (in the case of significantly dilated upper tracts). A continent catheter-
                   izable stoma may be performed at the same time due to the frequent need for catheterization subsequent to the

===== PAGE 1368 =====
1368   c h a p t e r 12.6   Pediatric Urology

                                   procedure. Patients with limited mobility who require urethral catheterization can also opt for the placement of a
                                   continent catheterizable stoma using appendix or ileum. This may be done as a separate procedure with or without
                                   augmentation. These patients have often had many operations, and the operative team needs to consider possible
                                   latex sensitivity (see Appendix G).
                                   In some cases for treatment of urinary incontinence, bladder augmentation and stoma formation is combined with
                                   closure of the bladder neck or insertion of an artificial urethral sphincter.
                                   Patients with neurogenic bowel may become dehydrated more easily during bowel preparation prior to surgery.
                                   Although traditionally mechanical and antibiotic bowel preparation for 1–2 d prior to surgery was recommended,
                                    growing evidence in the general surgery literature suggests that bowel preparation does not reduce wound infections
                                    and anastomotic leaks and may actually increase ileus rates. Anesthesiologists should be aware of the length and
                                    extent of preop bowel preparation in case the patient has became dehydrated or suffered electrolyte imbalance due
                                    to this process. Special consideration should be made for patients who have ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunts; typi-
                                    cally care is made to sequester the shunt in sterile fashion, keeping it away from any spillage from bowel segments.
                                   Bladder augmentation: Bladder augmentation is usually performed on children with a small capacity bladder,
                                   resulting from congenital abnormalities or fibrosis with resulting poor compliance. Cystoscopy may or may not be
                                   performed in association. The patient is usually in supine position and the operation may be performed through a
                                   lower midline or Pfannenstiel incision. The bowel and bladder are mobilized, with wide intraperitoneal exposure so
                                   that consideration to insensible loss may be large in small children. The relevant bowel segment is harvested, and the
                                   remaining native bowel is reanastomosed across the defect in the standard stapled or hand-sewn fashion. The “patch”
                                   of bowel segment is then sewn on to the bladder using running absorbable suture to minimize risk of s ubsequent
                                   nidus for bladder calculi. At the end of the procedure, a suprapubic tube is placed to decompress the bladder and
                                   allow irrigation of mucus produced by the bowel segments. Postoperatively, nasogastric decompression is main-
                                   tained until return of bowel function, and perioperative antibiotics are usually continued for a minimum of 3 d.
                                   Bladder perforation: With larger numbers of patients undergoing bladder augmentation, perforation is not
                                   uncommon. Extraperitoneal bladder perforation of a normal bladder may sometimes be managed with drainage
                                    alone, perforation of an augmented bladder is almost always managed operatively because the perforation is intra-
                                    peritoneal and usually involves bacteriuria.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Spinal cord injury, spina bifida, exstrophy, cerebral palsy; urinary incontinence; bladder
                                   tuberculosis, schistosomiasis, interstitial cystitis.
                                   Continent catheterizable stoma (Mitrofanoff appendicovesicostomy or Monti tube): In the case of a child
                                   who needs lifetime catheterization, a continent catheterizable abdominal stoma is often preferred due to its
                                   greater ease of catheterization, particularly for children with motor impairment. Use of the appendix as a flap-
                                   valve conduit between the bladder and the abdominal wall was first described by Mitrofanoff in 1980. Operative
                                   setup is similar to that of a bladder augmentation. After amputation of the appendix, its base is brought through
                                   the abdominal wall to form a stoma at the umbilicus. The tip of the appendix is amputated to create a tube, and a
                                   small submucosal trough is made in the posterolateral bladder and an indwelling catheter is placed in the chan-
                                   nel to maintain patency immediately postoperatively. Other continent stomas that can be catheterized may be
                                   constructed from short segments of bowel.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Spina bifida, spinal cord injury, or cerebral palsy with neurogenic bladder; urinary reten-
                                   tion or urinary incontinence, limited mobility.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Bladder Augmentation                           Continent Catheterizable Stoma

                                    Position                Supine                                          ⇐

                                    Incision                Lower midline incision                          ⇐

                                    Special                 Catheter in bladder/suprapubic tube, NG tube   Catheter in bladder/suprapubic tube, NG tube,
                                      instrumentation                                                      catheter in stoma

                                    Unique                  Spina bifida pts may have latex allergy        Pts with chronic catheterization may have
                                      considerations                                                       infected urine; treat with preop antibacterial
                                                                                                           irrigation and culture-specific antibiotics

===== PAGE 1369 =====
Penile Surgery      1369

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Bladder Augmentation                               Continent Catheterizable Stoma

                     Antibiotics             Broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g.,                  ⇐
                                             3rd-generation cephalosporin)

                     Surgical time           3.5 h                                              4.5 h (with augmentation) or 1.5 h (without
                                                                                                augmentation)

                     EBL                     100 cc                                             ⇐

                     Postop care             PACU – > ward                                      ⇐

                     Mortality               <1%                                                ⇐

                     Morbidity               Electrolyte abnormalities, growth retardation      Stomal stenosis (30–40%)
                                             (>50%)
                                             Bladder calculi (10–50%)
                                             Rupture of augmented bladder (5–10%)
                                             Small bowel obstruction (3%)
                                             Bladder cancer (1%)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Transurethral Procedures, Open Bladder Procedures, Penile Surgery, Genital
                   Procedures (p. 1372).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Adams MC, Joseph DB: Urinary tract reconstruction in children. In: Wein A, Kavoussi L, Novick AC, et al, eds. Campbell-
                        Walsh Urology, Vol 4, 10th edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia: 2012, 3457–502.
                     2. Camey M, Thuroff J, Reddy P, et al: Principles of bladder substitution. In: Hinman F Jr ed. Atlas of Urologic Surgery, 2nd
                        edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1992, 768–82.
                     3. Gilbert SM, Hensle TW: Metabolic consequences and long-term complications of enterocystoplasty in children: a review.
                        J Urol 2005; 173(4):1080–6.

                   Penile Surgery

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pediatric penile operations usually correct congenital urethral abnormalities or involve circumcision.
                   The most common surgical operation performed in the United States, circumcision, consists of the excision of the
                   preputial skin to expose the glans. It can be performed for religious, ethnic, social, or medical reasons (e.g., phimosis
                   or recurrent balanitis).
                   Circumcision: Freehand circumcision involves excising preputial skin using two incisions to remove a sleeve of
                   penile skin to fully expose the glans. At times, various clamps (Gomco, Mogen, etc.) can be used to circumcise in the
                   newborn period. Most circumcisions performed in the operating room on older children or those with penile skin
                   anomalies will be freehand excisions of the foreskin. Newer considerations regarding analgesia even in the neonate
                   recommend a penile block for this procedure. In older children being circumcised, both caudal and penile block
                   can offer similar duration of anesthesia (4–8 h), but school-age children may, however, be bothered more by leg
                   numbness and inability to void from the caudal block.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Phimosis, balanitis, family preference for circumcision
                   Hypospadias is the abnormal opening of the urethral meatus resulting from incomplete development of the urethra. The
                   defect can be located anywhere from the corona of the glans to the perineum. Accordingly, surgical correction can r equire

===== PAGE 1370 =====
1370   c h a p t e r 12.6   Pediatric Urology

                                   limited reconstruction as in the meatal advancement glanuloplasty (MAGPI) procedure or extensive dissection
                                   and reconstruction requiring 3–4 h of surgery. Although most pediatric urologists perform one-stage reconstruction
                                   for the majority of hypospadias, some more extensive cases may require a two-staged repair. An artificial e rection
                                   is obtained by infusion of normal saline into the corpora to judge need for and adequacy of repair. This may cause
                                   significant fluid absorption in a small child.
                                   The surgeon may choose not to use a urethral catheter in distal hypospadias repairs and some midshaft repairs. In
                                   such cases, caudal anesthesia should be avoided due to risk of urinary retention and risks of surgical complications
                                   relating to need for postoperative catheterization. A penile nerve block may be helpful in such cases with care given
                                   to avoiding a penile hematoma or disrupting penile anatomy or blood flow to the dorsal penis. Should a penile nerve
                                   block be performed, it is imperative that the surgeon ensure that no pharmacologic sympathomimetic agents such as
                                   epinephrine or ephedrine be included as this may cause penile glanular necrosis. In all cases, postoperative urethral
                                   instrumentation should be avoided because catheterization of the newly formed urethra could cause disruption of
                                   the repair. Catheters, when placed, are usually secured by stitching to the glans penis. Often at the conclusion of
                                   the surgery, the surgeon may require an additional 3–5 min of anesthesia to properly apply dressings to protect the
                                   hypospadias repair.
                                   In reoperative cases for repair of fistulae or other complications, bladder or buccal mucosa may be needed to create
                                   a new urethra. Use of buccal mucosa is popular but may require access to the patient’s mouth and inner buccal area.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Hypospadias ± chordee; fistula repair; epispadias repair; penile torsion; concealed penis

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                           Circumcision                                   Hypospadias

                                    Position               Supine                                         ⇐

                                    Incision               Circumferential penile                         ⇐ + ventral penis

                                    Special                None                                           Optical magnification, microscope
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine for    Tourniquet; injectable NS for artificial erection;
                                      considerations       better hemostasis.                             1% lidocaine. If a catheter is placed, liberal iv
                                                                                                          fluids may be given.

                                    Antibiotics            None                                           ⇐

                                    Surgical time          30 min                                         1.5–4 h

                                    EBL                    Minimal                                        < 50 mL

                                    Postop care            Outpatient                                     Outpatient or ward ± urethral catheter

                                    Mortality              < 1%                                           ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Morbidity              Infection: 2%                                  ⇐
                                                           Hematoma: 2%                                   ⇐
                                                                                                          Urethrocutaneous fistula (5–20%), urethral
                                                                                                          stricture, urethral diverticulum.

                                    Pain score             2                                              5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              Neonates–children                              > 4 mo

                                    Incidence              61%                                            1:300

                                    Etiology               Acquired                                       Congenital

                                    Associated             Infection                                      Cryptorchidism; inguinal hernia; bifid scrotum
                                      conditions

===== PAGE 1371 =====
Genital Procedures (Clitoroplasty, Vaginoplasty, Urethroplasty)                1371

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Transurethral Procedures, Open Bladder Procedures, Penile Surgery, Genital
                   Procedures (p. 1372).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Efe E, Resim S, Bulut BB, et al: Successful treatment with enoxaparin of glans inschemia due to local anesthesal after
                        circumcision. Pediatrics 2013;13(2):e608–11.
                     2. Snodgrass W, Baskin LS: Abnormalities of the genitalia in boys and their surgical management. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack
                        JT, Howards SS, et al, eds. Adult and Pediatric Urology, Vol III, 4th edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2002, 2509–32.
                     3. Weksler N, Atias I, Klein M, et al: Is penile block better than caudal epidural block for post-circumcision analgesia? J Anesth
                        2005; 19(1):36–9.
                     4. Wilton NT: Postoperative pain management for pediatric urologic surgery. Urologic Clin North Am 1995; 22(1):189–201.

                   Genital Procedures (Clitoroplasty,
                   Vaginoplasty, Urethroplasty)
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Masses of the introitus include urethral prolapse, prolapsed ectopic ureterocele, and rhabdomyosarco-
                   ma. Genitoplasty usually is performed in female patients with abnormal genitalia, for example, ambiguous genitalia
                   resulting from abnormal steroidogenesis (congenital adrenal hyperplasia [CAH], danazol exposure) and urogenital
                   sinus or cloacal anomalies.
                   Urethral prolapse repair: With the patient in a lithotomy position, a simple circumferential incision is made at the
                   junction between the prolapsed mucosa and the urethral meatus. The prolapsed tissue is excised, and anastomosis is
                   performed with absorbable suture. Introital rhabdomyosarcoma often requires open or transurethral biopsy of the
                   mass and is usually treated with chemotherapy.
                   Vaginoplasty/clitoroplasty: These procedures are performed in patients with ambiguous genitalia and are usu-
                   ally associated with hormonal imbalance (CAH). In the past, this surgery was performed urgently in neonates for
                   gender assignment reasons, but current belief is that there is little reason for this and repair can be delayed until
                   later or puberty. The initial procedure usually requires reduction of the enlarged clitoris and reconstruction of the
                   labioscrotal folds. With the patient in a lithotomy position, skin incisions are made to allow partial resection of the
                   corporal bodies and glans with nerve sparing. Periclitoral skin flaps are used to reconstruct the clitoris and labial
                   folds. Vaginoplasty is performed through a perineal approach by creating an urethrovaginal septum. The vagina
                   usually can be pulled into its normal position between the urethra and rectum and anastomosed to perineal skin
                   flaps using absorbable sutures. Vaginoplasty can be performed with clitoroplasty in an infant. If performed later in

                                                                                                                                                                  Pediatric Surgery
                   life (puberty), a vaginoplasty with complex flaps and bowel interposition is necessary. Many of these patients are on
                   long-term corticosteroid replacement therapy, and therefore, preop stress dosing of steroids may be indicated; if a
                   long, complicated intraabdominal procedure is anticipated, an abdominoperineal approach is required. A loop of
                   sigmoid colon or ileum is isolated, along with its mesentery and is brought through the perineal incision. It is then
                   anastomosed proximally to the vagina and distally to skin flaps. Also, these procedures may be used for gender reas-
                   signment if masculinization of the ambiguous genitalia in a genotypic male is not possible.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ambiguous genitalia; CAH; cloacal exstrophy; urogenital sinus persistence; danazol
                   exposure

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                      Lithotomy

                     Incision                      Perineal

                     Special                       Loupes
                       instrumentation             (magnification)

===== PAGE 1372 =====
1372   c h a p t e r 12.6     Pediatric Urology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Position                      Lithotomy

                                    Unique considerations         Steroid replacement may be necessary (CAH)

                                    Antibiotics                   Gentamicin 1.7 mg/kg iv (children)

                                    Surgical time                 2–4 h

                                    EBL                           10–15 mL

                                    Postop care                   ± Urethral catheter

                                    Mortality                     < 1%

                                    Morbidity                     Infection: < 5%
                                                                  Bleeding: < 5%
                                                                  Flap necrosis: < 5%

                                    Pain score                    6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                     Clitoroplasty: 3–6 mo; vaginoplasty: puberty

                                    Incidence                     1:30,000 births (ambiguous genitalia)

                                    Etiology                      Congenital

                                    Associated conditions         Hypothalamic-pituitary axis suppression; adrenal hyperplasia; steroid replacement therapy

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Hussman D: Intersex. In: Gillenwater JY, Grayhack JT, Howards SS, et al, eds. Adult and Pediatric Urology, Vol 3, 4th edition.
                                        Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 2002, 2533–64.
                                     2. Rink R, Kaefer M: Surgical management of intersexuality, cloacal malformations, and other genitalia in girls. In: Walsh PC,
                                        Retik AB, Vaughn ED, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology, 10th edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia: 2012, 3629–66.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR TRANSURETHRAL
                                       PROCEDURES, OPEN BLADDER PROCEDURES, PENILE
                                       SURGERY, GENITAL PROCEDURES
                                       PREOPERATIVE
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Typically, infants and children presenting for these procedures are otherwise healthy, with some notable exceptions.
                                   Vesicoureteral reflux may be associated with renal dysplasia and HTN. The prune belly (Eagle-Barrett) syndrome
                                   includes dystrophic abdominal musculature, requiring an evaluation of pulmonary function. Bladder and cloacal
                                   exstrophy may be accompanied by a spinal cord abnormality (e.g., tethered cord, spina bifida). Congenital cardiac
                                   anomalies may be present, and an evaluation should be performed prior to surgery.
                                   Pediatric urology patients with lower urinary tract dysfunction and underlying neurologic disorders (e.g., myelome-
                                   ningocele) and exstrophy are at risk for developing latex allergy as a result of repeated urethral catheterizations or
                                   surgical procedures. (See p. G-1.)
                                   Circumcision and hypospadias repair are most commonly performed in the first 2 years of life in otherwise healthy
                                   children.

                                   Respiratory                 Prune belly syndrome: pulmonary function may be decreased. 3 for Hx of respiratory
                                                               compromise. Postop ventilatory support may be necessary. 3 adequate reversal of NMB
                                                               and force of cough.
                                                               Tests: CXR; others as indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 1373 =====
Genital Procedures (Clitoroplasty, Vaginoplasty, Urethroplasty)         1373

                    Renal                  Renal anomalies may be present as part of a congenital malformation complex.
                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Endocrine              Surgery for genital disorders usually are performed to reshape anatomic abnormalities 2°
                                           congenital endocrine disorders. Ambiguous genitalia are associated with congenital adre-
                                           nal abnormalities. They are usually detected in the first month of life and may lead to severe
                                           salt-losing crises with ↑ Na+ and ↓ K+. The electrolyte status of these patients must be
                                           evaluated in the preop period. Treatment consists of steroid replacement.
                                           Tests: Electrolytes; blood sugar

                    Premedication          If > 7–9 m of age, consider midazolam premedication (0.5 mg/kg) po or 1–2 mg iv (see
                                           p. D-1).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA (ETT or LMA) using a pediatric circle. A combined technique with epidural or caudal
                   anesthesia is often used. For small children, warm OR to 70–75°F. Use warming pad and/or forced air warming on
                   OR table.

                    Induction             For patients < 5–10 yr, standard mask induction with sevoflurane/N2O/O2. Older patients
                                          may agree to standard iv induction, facilitated by the use of topical local anesthetic cream
                                          or patch (see p. D-1). For open-bladder and complex genital procedures, an indwelling epi-
                                          dural catheter for intraop and postop pain relief is recommended.

                    Maintenance           Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3). With epidural anesthesia, volatile and/or iv
                                          anesthetic requirements are reduced.

                    Emergence             Typically, no special considerations. Carefully evaluate patient for adequate ventilation
                                          prior to extubation in those with prune belly syndrome.

                    Blood and fluid       Minimal blood loss                      Complex cases may be associated with significant
                       requirements       IV: 22 or 24 ga × 1                     blood loss and require transfusion with whole blood
                                          NS/LR @ (maintenance):                  or PRBC.
                                             4 mL/kg/h (1–10 kg)
                                             + 2 mL/kg/h (11–20 kg)
                                             + 1 mL/kg/h (>20 kg)

                    Monitoring            Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                          ± Arterial line                         Place arterial line for measurement of arterial gases
                                                                                  or to 3 Hct and blood glucose if significant blood
                                                                                  loss or long case is anticipated, in patients with con-
                                                                                  current renal dysfunction.

                                                                                                                                                    Pediatric Surgery
                    Positioning           3 and pad pressure points
                                          3 eyes

                    Complications         Nerve damage                            In lower extremities, 3 if padding is insufficient with
                                                                                  lithotomy position.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications          Prune belly: hypoventilation                  Assisted ventilation may be required.
                                           Adrenogenital syndrome: adrenal
                                           insufficiency

                    Pain                   Acetaminophen                                 See p. E-4.
                      management           Epidural (p. E-6) or
                                           PCA (p. E-4) analgesia
                                           IV opioids                                    Ditropan or ketorolac will ↓ bladder spasm.
                                                                                         Ketorolac → renal insufficiency. Do not use if
                                                                                         renal function is abnormal.

===== PAGE 1374 =====
1374   c h a p t e r 12.6      Pediatric Urology

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracis, urologic and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 745–86.
                                     2. Landsman IS, Ziegler LN, Deshpande JK: Anesthesia for pediatric urologic procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB
                                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 740–57.

                                   Inguinoscrotal Procedures
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Undescended testis (cryptorchidism), hydrocele, and inguinal hernia are common in pediatric urol-
                                   ogy, and surgery is usually performed on an outpatient basis. Testicular torsion is one of the few true pediatric uro-
                                   logic emergencies because testicular infarction will occur within hours of the torsion. Testicular tumors in children,
                                   accounting for 1–2% of all pediatric solid tumors, are more frequently benign than those in adults and represent the
                                    main indication for radical or simple orchiectomy.
                                   Orchiopexy: Orchiopexy for a palpable undescended testis is performed through a small inguinal incision. A non-
                                   palpable testis may warrant diagnostic laparoscopy as the initial procedure; otherwise, the external oblique fascia is
                                   opened, exposing the inguinal canal. An initially nonpalpable testis may become palpable with anesthetic relaxation.
                                   The testis is localized, and the cord is dissected to gain adequate length for scrotal fixation, without torsion or ten-
                                   sion, to prevent postop ischemia and atrophy. If the testicle is high and adequate inguinal mobilization is not possible,
                                   dissection into the retroperitoneum may be required. The scrotal pouch is created by skin incision two-thirds the
                                   way down to the scrotum and blunt dissection between the skin and dartos muscle. The testis is fixed with suture
                                   material.
                                   Both ilioinguinal nerve block and caudal analgesia appear to be equally effective in management of postorchiopexy
                                   pain, but parents should be counseled on the risk of postoperative urinary retention with caudals. When inguinal
                                   block is contemplated prior to incision, this should be discussed with the surgeon. At times, inguinal infiltration dis-
                                   torts the anatomy and may perforate the hernia sac, thus turning a relatively simple operation into a more complex
                                   one. Alternatively, the block may be performed at the end of the procedure or the wound irrigated with 0.25% bupi-
                                   vacaine, which provides excellent postoperative analgesia and facilitates early discharge from the surgical recovery
                                   unit. (Also see Surgery for the Undescended Testicle, p. 1375.)
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cryptorchidism; nonpalpable testis
                                   Testicular torsion is a pediatric urologic emergency. There is no definitive diagnostic imaging study, although Dop-
                                   pler and isotope scans of the testis can be useful. At times, symptoms of testicular torsion may be indistinguishable
                                   from epididymitis or torsion of the testicular appendages (embryonic remnants). The testis is delivered through a
                                   scrotal incision, examined, detorsed, and assessed for viability. If the testis is nonviable, a simple scrotal orchiec-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   tomy is performed. If the testicle is viable, it is fixed in a scrotal dartos pouch, or some may perform 3-point suture
                                   fixation. The contralateral testis is fixed in a similar fashion. A torsion of a testicular appendage usually is treated
                                   medically with pain control and anti-inflammatory agents. If this condition is discovered at surgical exploration, the
                                   diseased tissue is excised, the testis is simply reinserted in the scrotum, and the wound is closed. It should be noted
                                   that neonatal (antenatal) or perinatal torsion may be performed in the newborn period. If the diagnosis is unclear,
                                   and/or there is an associated hydrocele or hernia, this operation may be performed through an inguinal incision.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Testicular torsion; torsion of the testicular appendage
                                   Hydrocelectomy–inguinal hernia repair: This procedure is performed through an inguinal incision and dissec-
                                   tion of the inguinal canal. The patent processus vaginalis is carefully dissected from the cord structures; the perito-
                                   neal sac is ligated at the level of the internal inguinal ring; and the wound is closed after evacuation of the hydrocele
                                   liquid. (Also see Repair of Inguinal and Umbilical Hernias, Hydrocele, p. 1375.)
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Hydrocele; inguinal hernia
                                   Radical orchiectomy: Although simple orchiectomy is performed through a scrotal incision, radical orchiectomy
                                   (used when testicular cancer is suspected) is performed through an inguinal incision. The external oblique fascia is

===== PAGE 1375 =====
Inguinoscrotal Procedures        1375

                   opened, and the spermatic cord is isolated and clamped at the level of the internal ring. The testis is delivered through
                   the incision and examined. If the testis is felt to contain malignancy, the cord is ligated and divided at the level of the
                   internal inguinal ring. If there is uncertainty in the Dx, a biopsy can be performed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Testicular mass

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Hydrocelectomy, Hernia Repair            Orchiopexy, Orchiectomy

                     Position                Supine                                   ⇐

                     Incision                Inguinal/scrotal                         ⇐ + Can be extended to reach retroperitoneum ±
                                                                                      laparoscopic exploration.

                     Antibiotics             None                                     ⇐

                     Surgical time           1h                                       ⇐

                     EBL                     Minimal                                  ⇐

                     Postop care             PACU → home                              ⇐

                     Mortality               < 1%                                     ⇐

                     Morbidity               Infection: 1–2%                          Testicular atrophy: 7%
                                             Recurrence: 1%

                     Pain score              5                                        5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                    1 yr–puberty                      Cryptorchidism: 1–2 yr
                                                                                    Torsion: 0–18 yr

                     Incidence                    1–4%                              Cryptorchidism: 3%
                                                                                    Torsion: 1:4000

                     Etiology                     Congenital                        ⇐

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Orchiopexy, orchiectomy, hydrocelectomy, and hernia repair are performed most commonly in otherwise healthy

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                   children.

                    Renal                     With phimosis, there may be Hx of UTIs. Possible pyelonephritis. Hematuria requires GU
                                              workup.
                                              Tests: UA; renal function (BUN, Cr), as clinically indicated

                    Laboratory                Hct; others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             If > 7 to 9 m of age, consider midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po) before induction. If > 10 yr old:
                                              standard premedication (see p. D-1).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or LMA/mask anesthetic, using a pediatric circle (consider using humidified and
                   warmed gases for infants). A combined technique with caudal anesthesia often is used for nonendoscopic proce-
                   dures. For small children, warm OR to 70–75°F. Use warming pad and/or forced air warming on OR table.

===== PAGE 1376 =====
1376   c h a p t e r 12.6     Pediatric Urology

                                   Induction                  In younger patients, mask induction is customary before iv placement. If the surgical
                                                              procedure will be > 30 min, tracheal intubation or LMA is preferred. Intermediate-acting
                                                              NMR (e.g., rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg iv or vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg iv) is administered to
                                                              facilitate tracheal intubation. If appropriate, caudal anesthesia can be obtained using
                                                              ropivacaine 2%, bupivacaine 0.125 or 0.25% ± epinephrine 1: 200,000; 1 mL/kg up to
                                                              10 mL total. Test dose of 1 mL should be given after a negative aspiration through the
                                                              catheter or needle. A positive test dose, in contrast to adults epidural test dose, could be
                                                              indicated by an increase in HR, a decrease in HR, a decrease in BP, or ST-T wave changes.
                                                              The caudal local anesthetic dose should be fractionated with frequent aspirations. The
                                                              addition of clonidine (1–2 mcg/kg) to the caudal block intensifies and prolongs the
                                                              analgesia, with minimal sedation. Acetaminophen 30–40 mg/kg PR or 10 mg/kg iv over
                                                              30 min may be given following intubation.

                                   Maintenance                Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3). If no regional block is performed, at least
                                                              2 MAC anesthesia is required prior to skin incision to prevent laryngospasm in nonin-
                                                              tubated patients. Caudal anesthesia can be used to provide the majority of analgesia in
                                                              nonendoscopic procedures.

                                   Emergence                  If neuromuscular blockade is used, reverse with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg iv) and atropine
                                                              (0.02 mg/kg iv) or glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg iv). Extubate when patient is fully awake or
                                                              deep.

                                   Blood and fluid            Negligible blood loss                      Pediatric maintenance:
                                      requirements            IV: 20–22 ga × 1                           4 mL/kg/h (0–10 kg)
                                                              NS/LR @ maintenance                        + 2 mL/kg/h (11–20 kg)
                                                                                                         + 1 mL/kg/h (>20 kg)

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                  Ocular compression/corneal abrasion may occur
                                                              3 eyes                                     with oversized mask.

                                   Complications              Laryngospasm                               Rx: 100% O2, jaw thrust, positive pressure. If iv is
                                                                                                         present, first deepen the level of anesthesia with
                                                                                                         propofol. If necessary, administer succinylcholine
                                                                                                         (1–2 mg/kg iv) in addition to atropine (0.02 mg/kg
                                                                                                         iv). If no iv, can give succinylcholine 3 mg/kg im,
                                                                                                         atropine 0.02 mg/kg im.
                                                              Intravascular local anesthetic             Epinephrine in caudal anesthetic (to detect intra-
                                                              administration                             vascular administration) does not significantly pro-
                                                                                                         long analgesia.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Bleeding

                                   Pain                       Caudal or regional block                   Optimal analgesia and presence of parents in PACU
                                     management               Acetaminophen (10–20 mg po/iv              will minimize child’s agitation/movement/crying.
                                                              and 10 mg q 6 h pr 30–40 mg pr on
                                                              1st dose, followed by 20 mg q 6 h
                                                              prn)

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Barthold JS: Abnormalities of the testis and scrotum and their surgical management. In: Wein A, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh
                                        Urology, 10th edition. Elseview Sanders, Philadelphia: 2012, 3557–96.
                                     2. Fernandes ML, Pires KC, Tiburcio MA, Gomez RS: Caudal bupivacaine supplemented with morphine or clonidine, or
                                        supplemented with morphine plus clonidine in children undergoing infra-umbilical and genital procedures: a prospective,
                                        randomized and double-blind study. J Anesth 2012 Apr; 26(2):213–8. [Epub 2011 Dec 10.]

===== PAGE 1377 =====
Laparoscopic Procedures            1377

                     3. Hammer G, Hall S, Davis PJ: Anesthesia for general abdominal, thoracis, urologic and bariatric surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP,
                        Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 745–86.
                     4. Jagannathan N, Sohn L, Sawardekar A, et al: Unilateral groin surgery in children: with the addition of an ultrasound-guided
                        ilioinguinal nerve block enhance the duration of analgesia of a single-shot caudal block? Paediatr Anaesth 2009; 19(9):
                        892–8.
                     5. Landsman IS, Ziegler LN, Deshpande JK: Anesthesia for pediatric urologic procedures. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB
                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 740–57.
                     6. Manickam A, Vakamudi M, Parameswari A, Chetan C: Source Department of Anesthesiology Critical Care and Pain
                        Medicine, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai, Tamil, Nadu, India. Efficacy of clonidine as an adjunct to ropiuacaine
                        for caudal analgesia in children undergoing subumbilical surgery. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 2012; 28(2):185–9.
                     7. Polaner DM, Taenzer AH, Walker BJ, et al: Pediatric regional anesthesia network (PRAN): a multi-institutional study of the
                        use and incidence of complications of pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(6):1353–64.
                     8. Ponde VC: Recent developments in pediatric neuraxial blocks. Indian J Anaesth 2012; 56(5):470–8.
                     9. Rubin K, Sullivan D, Sadhadivan S: Are peripheral and neuraxial blocks with ultrasound guidance more effective and safe in
                        children? Paesiatr Anaesth 2009; 19(2):92–5.
                    10. Tobias JD: Caudal epidural block: a review of test dosing and recognition of systemic injection in children. Anesth Analg 2011;
                        93(5):1156–61.

                   Laparoscopic Procedures
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Laparoscopy has become a useful technique for many pediatric urologists. It is used widely to lo-
                   cate the impalpable testis (diagnostic laparoscopy), with subsequent laparoscopic orchidopexy as needed and
                   has gained popularity for other procedures such as nephrectomy, partial nephrectomy, nephroureterectomy,
                   adrenalectomy, pyeloplasty, and varicocelectomy.
                   As in adults, pneumoperitoneum is created by insufflating CO2 (to a pressure of 12–16 mm Hg) either through the
                   Veress needle technique or after trocar insertion in the peritoneal cavity through a small, 1-cm periumbilical incision
                   under direct vision (Hasson technique). Other trocars (2, 5, or 10 mm) are then inserted, as necessary, under direct
                   laparoscopic vision, avoiding abdominal wall vessels and internal organs.
                   Impalpable testis: If diagnostic laparoscopy reveals blind ending vessels, confirming the absence of a testis, the
                   procedure is terminated and no inguinal incision is made. An inguinal testis remnant usually indicates either ante-
                   natal testicular ischemia or torsion. If the vessels are seen to enter the inguinal ring, the laparoscopy is ended and
                   inguinal exploration is performed. If the testis is located intraabdominally, it is evaluated for size and location to
                   determine whether to proceed to orchiectomy or a one- to two-stage (Fowler Stevens) orchiopexy. Laparoscopic
                   ligation of the gonadal vessels may be done with placement of the testis into a scrotal pouch (dartos pouch) in one
                   stage, if adequate cord length permits. In other situations, laparoscopic or open dissection of testicular vessels on a

                                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                   peritoneal pedicle in the retroperitoneum may be performed. A 2nd-stage Fowler Stevens is performed after ligation
                   of the gonadal vessels to allow adequate collateral vascular development before the intraabdominal testis is brought
                   into the scrotum. Laparoscopic orchiectomy or gonadectomy also may be performed in intersex situations for a
                   dysgenetic (streak), nonviable gonad or for a gonad in which inadequate cord length exists.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nonpalpable testis; cryptorchidism
                   Varicocele ligation: Through a transperitoneal approach identical to that of the approach for diagnostic laparos-
                   copy, the spermatic veins are isolated from the abdominal wall and are ligated with metallic clips to reduce the vari-
                   cocele. The primary complications from this procedure are hydrocele and varicocele recurrence.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Varicocele
                   Heminephrectomy, nephroureterectomy, and pyeloplasty: With the patient in the lateral-decubitus position,
                   the initial trocar is inserted extraperitoneally on the anterior axillary line just below the 12th rib. The prone position
                   has also been described for a retroperitoneal approach. Gas dissection is used to open the retroperitoneal space,
                   and kidney dissection is performed. In a nephrectomy, the hilar vessels are ligated with metallic clips. The kidney is
                   then retrieved through the 10-mm port by morcellating it or the incision can be dilated or elongated. Laparoscopic

===== PAGE 1378 =====
1378   c h a p t e r 12.6   Pediatric Urology

                                   pyeloplasty is carried out using the same principles as open pyeloplasty, namely dismembering the ureter from the
                                   renal pelvis, spatulation of the ureter, and careful reassembly of the ureteropelvic unit. Whether surgery is performed
                                   intra or extraperitoneal laparoscopic/robotic surgery with CO2 insufflation is associated with significant systemic
                                   hemodynamic changes in children.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: UPJ obstruction; infected or nonfunctioning kidney; HTN; multicystic or dysplastic kidney;
                                   protein-losing nephropathy in ESRD

                                   Robotic-Assisted Procedures
                                       Surgical Considerations
                                   Robotic laparoscopic procedures are becoming increasingly common, with robotic pyeloplasty and ureteral reim-
                                   plantation being among the most common. Advantages to the use of the robot include improved 3D visualization
                                   and instrument control for surgical precision compared to traditional laparoscopy. Though the data are limited, there
                                   is increasing evidence that robotic surgery may afford decreased postop pain, shorter hospital stays, and decreased
                                   blood loss. However, approximately 20–45 min of robot setup time should be calculated into the time under anesthe-
                                   sia. Adequate leg padding and solid securing of the patient to the bed during these procedures is again of paramount
                                   importance both for ease of the surgery as well as patient safety during the procedure.
                                   Robotic vesicoureteral reimplantation: After initial cystoscopy to determine that there is adequate size for a
                                   robotic procedure, the patient is placed in a supine position with legs splayed. This procedure may be performed
                                   extravesically intraperitoneal or intravesically. These approaches have similar concerns to other robotic intraperi-
                                   toneal surgery, and urethral catheters are usually left in place. A Hassan port is placed through a midline incision
                                   one-third of the way from the umbilicus to the pubis. The bladder is cleared, and a balloon trocar is placed through
                                   a cystotomy into the bladder, followed by two robotic working ports. The robot is then docked, coming in from the
                                   direction of the patient’s feet and the patient is dropped into the Trendelenburg position, which provides improved
                                   exposure of the pelvic organs, allowing bowel to drop away. At this point, either extravesical or intravesical repair
                                   may be attempted. Primary complications following robotic reimplant include bladder leak, transient obstruction,
                                   and persistent reflux.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Vesicoureteral reflux

                                   Robotic pyeloplasty: A urethral stent may be placed before approach to pyeloplasty to help identify the ureter dur-
                                   ing the case. The patient is then placed in a modified flank position, pressure points padded and secured firmly to
                                   the table. A test roll of the table should occur prior to the docking of the robot. The abdomen is insufflated, and the
                                   trocars are placed. Once the UPJ is identified, a hitch stitch is often placed through the abdominal wall. The diseased
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   portion of ureter is then removed and reanastomosed. Prior to definitive closure of the anastomosis, a stent is usually
                                   placed with a periureteral drain.

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: UPJ obstruction

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                           Undescended Testis/
                                                           Varicocele                            Robotic Reimplant              Renal Surgery

                                    Position               Supine; 15° Trendelenburg             Supine, legs splayed,          Lateral decubitus
                                                                                                 Trendelenburg

                                    Incision               5- to 10-mm umbilical port + one or   12-mm umbilical port and       Four ports usually
                                                           two additional ports                  5- to 8-mm working ports × 2   necessary

===== PAGE 1379 =====
Robotic-Assisted Procedures    1379

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                         Undescended Testis/
                                         Varicocele                                Robotic Reimplant          Renal Surgery

                     Special             Bladder catheterization, NG tube          Cystoscopy, bladder        ⇐
                       instrumentation                                             catheterization

                     Unique              Secure child firmly to avoid move-                                   ⇐
                       considerations    ment with table tilting. Intraabdominal
                                         pressure = 14–16 mm Hg. Lower
                                         pressure may be needed if pulmo-
                                         nary mechanics are compromised.
                                         Urethral catheter commonly placed.

                     Antibiotics         None                                      As necessary per preop     ⇐
                                                                                   urine culture

                     Surgical time       30 min to 1 h                             3–5 h                      2.5 h (nephrectomy) to 4 h
                                                                                                              (pyeloplasty)

                     EBL                 Minimal                                   ⇐                          ⇐

                     Postop care         PACU → home                               PACU → ward                PACU → ward

                     Mortality           < 1%                                      ⇐                          ⇐

                     Morbidity           Overall: 0.6–5%                           ⇐                          ⇐

                                         Trocar misplacement: bowel                ⇐                          ⇐
                                         perforation

                                         Vascular/organ thermal injury from        ⇐                          ⇐
                                         electrocautery

                                         CO2 embolus                               ⇐                          Bleeding < 5%

                                         Grounding pad thermal injury              Bladder leak

                                         Trocar site bleeding, trocar hernia       Transient obstruction

                                         Varicocele only: Recurrent varico-        Recurrent reflux
                                         cele (1–11%), hydrocele (1–5%)

                     Pain score          2                                         4                          4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                     Age range               10 mo–18 yr

                     Male:Female             Male (cryptorchidism)

                     Incidence               3% of newborn boys

                     Etiology                Congenital

                     Associated              Renal insufficiency
                       conditions

===== PAGE 1380 =====
1380   c h a p t e r 12.6     Pediatric Urology

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   During mask induction, care should be taken to avoid excessive positive pressure with consequent insufflation of
                                   the stomach. An OGT should be placed immediately after induction and intubation to remove air from the stom-
                                   ach, decreasing the risk of gastric puncture with placement of trocars and improving surgical view during proce-
                                   dure. Creation of a pneumoperitoneum as part of a laparoscopic procedure impairs ventilation and can restrict
                                   venous return. The use of Trendelenburg and lithotomy positions can further compromise respiratory function.
                                   Anesthetic considerations for pediatric patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures are further considered in
                                   12.5 (Anesthesia for Minimally—Invasive Surgery in Pediatric Patients, p. 1352). Severely limited patient access in
                                   robotic-assisted surgery makes it difficult to respond to the patient. A practice trial maneuvering the cumbersome
                                   robotic equipment should be performed to ensure rapid access to the patient in case of emergency. Care should be
                                   taken not to move the operating room table after the robotic arm/instruments are placed to avoid patient injury.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Carr MC, Casale P: Anomalies and surgery of the ureter in children. In: Wein A, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology, 10th
                                        edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia: 2012, 3212–35.
                                     2. Mariano ER, Furukawa L, Woo RK, et al: Anesthetic concerns for robot-assisted laparoscopy in an infant. Anesth Analg 2004;
                                        9(6):1665–7.
                                     3. Peters CA: Robotically assisted surgery in pediatric urology. Urol Clin N Am 2007; 31(4):743–752.
                                     4. Sweeney DD, Smaldone MC, Docimio SG: Minimally invasive surgery for urologic disease in children. Nat Clin Prac Urol
                                        2007; 4(1):26–38.

                                   Stone Procedures
                                       Surgical Considerations
                                   Description: The incidence of urinary tract calculi is becoming more common in children in the United States
                                   as well as in other parts of the world (e.g., Turkey). The reasons for this are unclear. For this reason, however, all
                                   stone surgical procedures are becoming more common and adapted to children. General techniques including
                                   extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), ureteral stent placement, cystolitholapaxy, and ureteroscopy
                                   are being used in infants and children. Often, these procedures require fluoroscopy, which may bring with it
                                   both equipment considerations (fluorocompatible moving tables) and positioning requirements to allow C-arm
                                   placement.
                                   ESWL (extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy): This procedure utilizes ultrasound to break apart the
                                   stone from outside the body. The child is placed in a supine position on a special bed. The need for general
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   anesthesia or sedation is still required to reduce movement as this procedure requires aiming the burst in 3
                                   dimensions but may depend on the child’s age, extent of stone burden, and the kind of extracorporeal litho-
                                   tripter being used. In some cases, electrohydraulic lithotripsy has required general anasethia with endotra-
                                   cheal intubation in young children, but in some cases, electromagnetic lithotripsy has been performed with
                                   sedation.
                                   Ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy: Positioning for this procedure requires lithotomy. If lasers are used, eye pro-
                                   tection for staff and the patient is required. Most lasers now used have a very short working distance so eye injury risk
                                   is small. Paralysis is needed for upper tract instrumentation as patient movement for a cough could cause ureteral
                                   perforation, especially when using the semirigid ureteroscope. After the stone is fragmented and removed, a stent is
                                   often left to prevent obstruction from ureteral edema or fragments. The stent is removed at a later date.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nephrolithiasis, ureterolithiasis

===== PAGE 1381 =====
Stone Procedures        1381

                     ■■ Summary of Procedures
                                                     ESWL                                                Ureteroscopy

                     Position                        Supine                                              Lithotomy

                     Incision                        None                                                ⇐

                     Antibiotics                     None                                                Septra or amp/gent

                     Surgical time                   1h                                                  1–2 h

                     EBL                             None                                                ⇐

                     Postop care                     PACU → home                                         ⇐

                     Mortality                       < 1%                                                ⇐

                     Morbidity                       Sepsis < 1%                                         Pyelonephritis < 5%

                                                     Hematoma < 1%                                       Ureteral perforation < 5%

                     Pain score                      2                                                   2

                     ■■ Patient Population Characteristics
                     Age range                 6 yr–puberty

                     Incidence                 36 per 100,000

                         Anesthetic Considerations
                   See anesthetic considerations p. 1372.
                   In addition, every child with renal calculi should undergo metabolic evaluation. Renal function should be checked
                   preoperatively. General anesthesia is usually required due to limited patient cooperation in the pediatric population
                   and need for precise positioning. Moderate pain may be expected and should be treated with opioid therapy. Ketoro-
                   lac should not be used due to potential renal effects.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. D’Addessi A, Bongiovanni L, Sasso F, Guliro G, Falabella R, Bassi P: Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy in pediatrics.
                        J Endourol 2008; 22(1):1–12.
                     2. Dwyer MA, et al: Temporal trends in incidence of kidney stones among children: a 25 year population based study. J Urol
                        2012; 188(1):247–52.
                     3. Gravenstein D: Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy and percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2000;
                        18(4):953–71.

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                     4. Gnessin E, Chertin L, Chertin B: Current management of pediatric urolithiasis. Pediatr Surg Int 2012; 28(7):659–65.
                     5. Ost M, Schneck F: Surgical management of pediatric stone disease. In: Wein A, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology, 10th ed.
                        Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia: 2012, 3667–4.

===== PAGE 1382 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.7 Pediatric
                                           Orthopedic Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           James G. Gamble, MD, PhD
                                           Amy L. Ladd, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Genevieve D’Souza, MD
                                           Brenda Golianu, MD
                                           R. J. Ramamurthi, MD, FRCA

===== PAGE 1384 =====
Percutaneous Pinning of Displaced
                                   Supracondylar Humerus Fracture
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Supracondylar fractures of the humerus are the most common elbow fractures in children and the
                                   most common pediatric fractures requiring reduction under GA. They have a justifiable reputation for complications
                                   because of the risk to the brachial artery and a high incidence of median or radial nerve palsies. The most serious
                                   potential complication is a compartment syndrome of the forearm, resulting in the need for emergency reduction
                                   and fasciotomy.
                                   The vast majority of these injuries result from falling on an outstretched arm with the elbow extended—a extremely
                                   common childhood event. Type 1 supracondylar fractures are minimally displaced and usually stable. They can be
                                   managed with a splint alone. Most supracondylar fractures are either Type 2 or Type 3 completely displaced fractures
                                   and require general anesthesia for closed reduction and percutaneous pinning.
                                   Flexion-type supracondylar fractures are more likely to require open reduction than extension-type injuries.
                                   Documentation of the neurovascular examination is mandatory immediately before anesthesia and upon awakening.
                                   When a patient appears in the emergency department, if the neurovascular status is normal, and if the patient has
                                   eaten recently, it may be safe to wait 6–8 h with continued monitoring of the neurovascular status. Reduction is ob-
                                   tained by a combination of traction and manipulation. Complete muscular relaxation is essential during the reduction
                                   maneuver. Usually two small smooth Kirschner wires are inserted under fluoroscopic control. Many surgeons prefer to
                                    use the intensifier screen as a platform; thus requiring the patient to be at the edge of the OR table. Occasionally, the
                                    fracture cannot be reduced closed, and an open reduction is necessary. In that case, the arm is reprepped, and a small,
                                    lateral incision is made to openly visualize and reduce the fracture. The same type of smooth pin fixation is then used.
                                    Prolonged skeletal traction, although used in the past, is rarely used, and the standard of care is reduction and percu-
                                    taneous pinning. Following the pinning, either a splint or well-padded cast is applied before the patient is awakened.

                                                                                                                       B
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                               C

                                                                                A

                                             Figure 12.7-1. Percutaneous pinning of supracondylar humerus fracture. A: The
                                             fracture is manually reduced and held with elbow flexed. B: Fracture reduction is
                                             assessed with I.I. C: The fracture is stabilized with percutaneous K-wires. (Reproduced
                                             with permission from Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition.
                                             Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                            1384

===== PAGE 1385 =====
Percutaneous Pinning of Displaced Supracondylar Humerus Fracture                      1385

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Supracondylar fracture of the elbow

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Percutaneous Pinning                                            Open Reduction
                    Position                  Usually supine, occasionally prone or lateral                   ⇐

                     Incision                 None                                                            1” lateral

                     Special                  Power drill, image intensifier, or FluoroScan                   ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   Full stomach; impending compartment syndrome                    ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              Usually none                                                    Cefazolin 25 mg/kg

                     Surgical time            30–60 min                                                       30–90 min

                     Closing                  Cast or splint                                                  ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                      Minimal                                                         ⇐

                     Postop care              PACU → room; close neurovascular monitoring                     ⇐

                     Mortality                Rare                                                            ⇐

                    Morbidity                 Late angular deformity, especially cubitus varus: 10%           ⇐
                                              Nerve palsy (typically radial nerve) from the fracture          ⇐
                                                 itself: 7%
                                              Compartment syndrome (Volkmann’s contracture):                  ⇐
                                                 < 0.5% (some degree of vascular spasm or loss of
                                                 radial pulse much more common)
                                              Stiffness, myositis ossificans                                  ⇐
                                              Ipsilateral fracture                                            ⇐
                    Pain score                3–5                                                             3–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 3–10 yr with peak age range of 5–8 yr.
                    Male:Female               1.6:1

                     Incidence                Frequent

                     Etiology                 Trauma, usually a fall

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                    Associated                Usually normal, healthy child
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Franklin CC, Skaggs DL: Approach to the pediatric supracondylar humeral fracture with neurovascular compromise. Instr
                        Course Lect 2013; 62:429–33.
                     2. Georgopoulos G, Carry P, Pan Z, Chang F, Heare T, Rhodes J, et al: The efficacy of intra-articular injections for pain control
                        following the closed reduction and percutaneous pinning of pediatric supracondylar humeral fractures: a randomized
                        controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2012; 94:1633–42.
                     3. Gordon JE, Patton CM, Luhmann SJ, et al: Fracture stability after pinning of displaced supracondylar distal humerus fractures
                        in children. J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 21(3):313–8.

===== PAGE 1386 =====
1386   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                     4. Kasser JR, Beaty JH: Supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus. In: Beaty JH, Kasser JR, eds. Fractures in Children.
                                        Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 2001;577–624.
                                     5. Mehan ST, May CD, Kocher MS: Operative management of displaced flexion supracondylar humerus fractures in children.
                                        J Pediatr Orthop 2007; 27:551–6.
                                     6. Mehlman CT, Strub WM, Roy DR, et al: The effect of surgical timing on the perioperative complications of treatment of
                                        supracondylar humeral fractures in children. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2001; 83A(3):323–7.
                                     7. Mulpuri K, Wilkins K: The treatment of displaced supracondylar humerus fractures: evidence-based guideline. J Pediatr
                                        Orthop 2012; 32 (Suppl 2):143–52.

                                   Closed Or Open Reduction of Displaced Lateral
                                   Condyle Humerus Fracture
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Lateral condylar fractures of the distal humerus are second only to supracondylar fractures in fre-
                                   quency. Initial radiographs of lateral condyle fractures can look deceptively normal; however, because these fractures
                                   cross the physis (growth plate) and enter the articular surface, they require anatomic reduction to restore joint sur-
                                   face congruity and to avoid a premature physeal arrest. In addition, the elbow may be unstable and dislocate if the
                                   fracture extends into the trochlea of the humerus. Accurate and stable reduction minimizes the risk of nonunion, a
                                   well-known complication resulting from unsuspected rotation of the fracture fragment and by traction forces of the
                                   extensor muscles attaching to this condyle. Unlike supracondylar fractures, neurovascular complications are rare
                                   with lateral condyle fractures.
                                   Although minimally displaced fractures can be treated with a cast, 60% of lateral condyle fractures are displaced and
                                   require manipulation and pinning. Casting without manipulation, and thus requiring no anesthesia, is indicated for
                                   stable fractures that are displaced < 2 mm. Closed reduction and percutaneous pinning under fluoroscopic con-
                                   trol requires general anesthesia and is indicated for stable fractures with 2–4 mm displacement. Open reduction
                                   and pinning is necessary for fractures that are unstable, rotated, or displaced more than 4 mm. Muscular relaxation
                                   is advantageous when performing either a closed or open reduction of the fracture. A sterile tourniquet is used for
                                   cases requiring open reduction.
                                   Usual preoperative diagnosis: Displaced lateral condyle humerus fracture

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Closed Reduction/Pinning                          Open Reduction/Pinning
                                    Position                 Supine                                            ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Incision                 None                                              1–2” lateral

                                    Instrumentation          Power drill, fluoroscopy                          ⇐

                                    Unique                   None                                              ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              Usually none                                      Cefazolin 25 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time            30–60 min                                         45–90 min

                                    Closing                  Cast or splint                                    ⇐
                                      considerations
                                    EBL                      Negligible                                        ⇐
                                    Postoperative care       PACU → room                                       ⇐
                                    Mortality                Rare                                              ⇐

===== PAGE 1387 =====
Aspiration and Injection of Unicameral Bone Cyst                1387

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                               Closed Reduction/Pinning                             Open Reduction/Pinning
                    Morbidity                  Delayed or nonunion                                  ⇐
                                               Cubitus valgus (more common) or varus                ⇐
                                               Lateral condylar overgrowth                          ⇐
                                               Physeal arrest                                       ⇐
                                               Osteonecrosis of lateral trochlea                    ⇐
                                               Ulnar nerve palsy                                    ⇐
                                                                                                    Avascular necrosis of trochlea
                    Pain score                 3–5                                                  3–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                  5–10 yr; average = 6 yr
                    Incidence                  15% of all elbow fractures; more common in summer

                     Etiology                  Trauma

                    Associated                 Usually normal, healthy child
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Beathy JH: Fractures of the lateral humeral condyle are the second most frequent elbow fracture in children. J Prthop Trauma
                        2010; 24:434–8.
                     2. Launay F, Leet AI, Jacopin S, et al: Lateral humeral condyle fractures in children: a comparison of two approaches to treatment.
                        J Pediatr Orthop 2004; 24:385–91.
                     3. Song KS, Water PM: Lateral condyle humerus fractures: which one should we fix? J Pediatr Orthop 2012; 32 (Suppl 1):S5–9.
                     4. Thomas DP, Howard AW, Cole WG, et al: Three weeks of Kirschner wire fixation for displaced lateral condylar fractures of
                        the humerus in children. J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 21(5):565–9.

                   Aspiration and Injection of Unicameral
                   Bone Cyst
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                   Description: Unicameral bone cysts (UBCs) are benign lesions typically located in the metaphyseal regions of long
                   bones, most commonly in the proximal humerus of a growing child. The cyst is rarely a source of pain until presentation
                   (typically after a fracture). The benign radiographic appearance allows clinicians to follow most lesions without the need
                   for surgical biopsy. Surgical care is indicated when the UBC is of sufficient size and location to cause mechanical weaken-
                   ing of the bone and predispose to a pathologic fracture. The goals of surgical care are to confirm the diagnosis of UBC
                   and to reestablish the mechanical integrity of the bone. Diagnosis of a UBC is made by percutaneous aspiration of the
                   lesion, using a standard 16- to 18-gauge spinal needle under general anesthesia. Fluoroscopic guidance facilitates needle
                   placement. The presence of clear, straw-colored fluid confirms diagnosis of UBC. An alternative diagnosis, such as aneu-
                   rismal bone cyst, is more likely if frank blood is aspirated. If the lesion contains no fluid, it may be a nonossifying fibroma.
                   Open biopsy may be necessary if the diagnosis is unclear. However, most cases can be treated adequately with per-
                   cutaneous aspiration and injection of a radiopaque dye to verify that the entire cavity is contiguous. If the cystic
                   cavity is loculated by bony trabecula, a curette or percutaneous Kirschner wire is used to convert the lesion into a
                   unicompartmental space so the subsequent injection will easily access the entire lesion. Scraping the inner cyst walls
                   also helps to disrupt the cyst lining and is thought to improve the chance of filling in the cavity. The final surgical step

===== PAGE 1388 =====
1388   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   is to introduce a second “venting” needle into the cyst to allow lavage with sterile saline, followed by injection of the
                                   cavity with a substance to promote new bone formation. Historically, methylprednisolone has been used, but more
                                   recent evidence suggests a higher success rate when autologous bone marrow is injected. Injectable allograft bone
                                   preparations also can supplement the bone marrow injection. Care must be taken to avoid aspirating from the first
                                   needle after the second has been placed, to avoid intraosseous air embolism.
                                   Usual preoperative diagnosis: Unicameral bone cyst

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Percutaneous                                         Open
                                    Position                  Supine                                               ⇐

                                    Incision                  None                                                 Length of cyst

                                    Instrumentation           Spinal needles, Kirschner wires, I.I.                Curettes

                                    Unique                    Risk of air embolus                                  Additional time for intraop pathology
                                      considerations                                                               evaluation

                                    Antibiotics               Usually none                                         Cefazolin 25 mg/kg

                                    Surgical time             30–60 min                                            60–90 min

                                    Closing                   None                                                 Cast or splint
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                       Minimal                                              ⇐

                                    Postop care               PACU → home                                          PACU → room/home

                                    Mortality                 Rare                                                 ⇐

                                    Morbidity                 Infection                                            ⇐
                                                              Iatrogenic fracture                                  ⇐
                                                              Growth arrest: rare                                  ⇐

                                    Pain score                0–2                                                  3–6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                 5–15 yr; not found in adults
                                    Male:Female               1:3

                                    Incidence                 20% of benign bone lesions; most common location is the proximal humerus (67%), followed by
                                                              the proximal femur (15%)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Etiology                  Unknown. Venous obstruction → fluid transudate containing high levels of interleukin-1 and inter-
                                                              leukin-6, which stimulate osteoclasts

                                    Associated                Usually normal, healthy child. Initial presentation typically follows a pathologic fracture.
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Alvarez RG, Arnold JM: Arthroscopic assistance in minimally invasive curettage and bone grafting of a calcaneal unicameral
                                        bone cyst. Foot Ankle Int 2007; 28:1198–9.
                                     2. Rougraff BT, Kling TJ: Treatment of active unicameral bone cysts with percutaneous injection of demineralized bone matrix
                                        and autogenous bone marrow. J Bone Joint Surg 2002; 84A(6):921–9.

===== PAGE 1389 =====
Release for Torticollis     1389

                   Release for Torticollis
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Congenital muscular torticollis is a painless tilting of the head due to contracture of the sterno-
                   cleidomastoid muscle. The head tilts toward the involved side and rotates toward the opposite side (a “cock-robin”
                   posture such that the chin points to the opposite side). It is associated with breech and difficult deliveries, as well
                   as other musculoskeletal disorders, such as metatarsus adductus, hip dysplasia, and talipes equinovarus. Multiple
                   theories regarding the etiology of congenital muscular torticollis have been proposed, including fibrosis of the
                   sternocleidomastoid muscle following a peripartum intramuscular bleed, fibrosis resulting from a compartment
                   syndrome of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, intrauterine crowding, and a primary myopathy of the sternocleido-
                   mastoid muscle. Eighty percent of cases of torticollis are a result of this congenital contracture of the sternocleido-
                   mastoid muscle. Less common etiologies—such as congenital cervical spine malformations (e.g., Klippel-Feil syn-
                   drome), neurologic disorders, a cranial or cervical neoplasm, inflammatory conditions (e.g., Grisel’s syndrome),
                   or an ocular dysfunction—should also be excluded. Congenital muscular torticollis is seen more frequently on the
                   right side. A persistent torticollis will lead to skull and facial deformities (plagiocephaly). If the child sleeps prone,
                   he will usually lie with the affected side down, resulting in flattening of the face on that side. If the child sleeps
                   supine, flattening of the contralateral skull occurs. This plagiocephaly will become permanent if the torticollis
                   persists and is left untreated.
                   Initial treatment includes physical therapy for stretching exercises. For children < 1 yr of age, a program of
                   sternocleidomastoid muscle stretching is recommended, with 90% of cases being resolved with this treat-
                   ment. After 2 yr of age, nonoperative treatment is not likely to be effective. Children with persistent torticol-
                   lis and an unacceptable amount of facial asymmetry preferably are treated surgically before the age of 3 yr;
                   however, some improvement in facial asymmetry has been shown even in children surgically treated up to
                   8 yr of age.
                   Surgical options include a unipolar release, a bipolar release, middle-third transection, or a complete resec-
                   tion. Unipolar release involves division of the distal insertion of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and usually is
                   performed for a mild deformity. Bipolar release entails division of both the sternocleidomastoid origin and inser-
                   tion and usually is done for more marked involvement. Z-plasty of the clavicular head or transfer of the clavicular
                   head to the sternal head may be done to maintain a more normal cosmetic contour of the neck. Potential surgical
                   complications include injury to the spinal accessory nerve, jugular veins, carotid vessels, and the facial nerve.
                   Postop, patients may perform simple stretching exercises, but they often require bracing to maintain a corrected
                   alignment.
                   Usual preoperative diagnosis: Congenital muscular torticollis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES

                                                                                                                                                        Pediatric Surgery
                                             Unipolar                                          Bipolar
                    Position                 Supine                                            ⇐

                     Incision                Transverse, 1.5 cm superior to sternum and        ⇐ + 1 cm distal to mastoid process behind
                                             clavicle over muscle insertion                    ear at muscle origin

                     Unique                  Plagiocephaly                                     ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg                                ⇐

                     Surgical time           30 min                                            45 min

                     EBL                     Minimal                                           ⇐

                     Postoperative care      PACU → room/home                                  ⇐

                     Mortality               Rare                                              ⇐

===== PAGE 1390 =====
1390   c h a p t e r 12.7      Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                              Unipolar                                              Bipolar

                                    Morbidity                 Hypertrophic scar                                     ⇐
                                                              Loss of normal muscle contour                         ⇐
                                                                                                                    Spinal accessory nerve injury

                                    Pain score                3–5                                                   3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                 Onset at birth, surgery after age 1 yr
                                    Male:Female               1:1

                                    Incidence                 1/500

                                    Etiology                  Fibrosis of sternocleidomastoid; possible intrauterine or perinatal muscle compartment
                                                              syndrome

                                    Associated                Usually normal, healthy child; hip dysplasia in 20%
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Shim JS, Noh KC, Park SJ: Treatment of congenital muscular torticollis in patients older than 8 years. J Pediatr Orthop 2004;
                                        24:683–8.
                                     2. Von Heideken J, Green DW, Burke SW, et al: The relationship between developmental dysplasia of the hip and congenital
                                        muscular torticollis. J Pediatr Orthop 2006; 26:805–8.

                                   Pollicization of a Finger
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Description: This procedure is indicated in the infant with congenital absence or hypoplasia of the thumb. A normal
                                   finger—usually the index finger—with its tendon, nerve, and vascular supply is shortened and rotated into the posi-
                                   tion of the thumb (Fig. 12.7-2). Tendon transfers are performed to substitute for the absent or hypoplastic thenar
                                   muscles. These patients may have many other associated congenital anomalies, which should be ruled out prior to
                                   surgery.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: There are several different surgical techniques, which share the basic trans-
                                   position and rotation of the finger to the thumb position.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Aplastic thumb; hypoplastic thumb; radial club hand; radial longitudinal deficiency

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                  Supine, with arm extended on hand surgery table

                                    Incision                  Multiple incisions on the hand

===== PAGE 1391 =====
Pollicization of a Finger    1391

                                Figure 12.7-2. Pollicization of a finger. (Reproduced with permission from Chapman
                                MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                Pneumatic tourniquet; magnification loupes
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg (children)

                     Surgical time          3–4 h

                     Tourniquet             100 mm Hg above systolic; max time = 120 min

                     Closing                Complex skin flaps are necessary. A plaster splint is placed while the patient is still anesthetized.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Minimal; performed under tourniquet control.

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                     Postop care            PACU → overnight admission for observation or perfusion to the transposed finger

                     Mortality              Minimal

                     Morbidity              Ischemia (loss of digit): Rare
                                            Skin flap necrosis: Moderately common

                    Pain score              1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range               1–2 yr is ideal time for surgery. Procedure should be done before patient begins school.
                    Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence              Overall, about 1/20,000 live births require a variant of this procedure.

                     Etiology               Unknown; also associated with thalidomide ingestion.

===== PAGE 1392 =====
1392   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                    Associated              Associated congenital anomalies of the upper extremity, esophagus, spine, and lower extremities
                                      conditions            Absence of radius (radial club hand), common
                                                            Various forms of syndactylies, common
                                                            Abnormalities of the hematopoietic system (Fanconi’s syndrome), cardiovascular system (ASDs in
                                                            Holt-Oram syndrome), spine, and GI system, along with hypothyroidism, are frequently associated.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.

                                   Syndactyly Repair
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Syndactyly refers to congenital failure of separation of two or more fingers. It is complete if it
                                   extends to the ends of the fingers; incomplete syndactyly extends short of the finger ends. A simple syndactyly
                                   repair joins fingers by only skin and fibrous tissues. A complex syndactyly repair signifies fusion of adjacent
                                   phalanges or interposition of accessory phalanges, with frequent abnormalities of the neurovascular structures.
                                   Surgical separation is performed in the first few years of life for functional as well as aesthetic reasons. The tech-
                                   nique involves creation of a dorsal, proximally based skin flap to recreate the web. A zigzag dorsal and palmar
                                   incision is then created, separating from the distal end in a proximal direction. The digital nerve and arteries are
                                   dissected proximally as far as possible. Primary closure is almost never possible, and supplemental full-thickness
                                   skin graft harvested from the groin is used to complete the closure. Usually only one site is done at a time per
                                   hand, and never should both sides of a digit be released because of risk to the vascular supply. It is not always
                                   possible to save all the bony elements. Patients with conditions such as Apert syndrome must undergo careful
                                   evaluation of the airway.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Syndactyly of fingers; bifid finger, thumb/finger

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine
                                    Incision                Zigzag between digits; skin graft donor site from groin
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Special                 Magnification loupes always necessary. Tourniquet is mandatory.
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Groin skin also must be taken for graft closure.
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             Usually none

                                    Surgical time           2–4 h

                                    Closing                 Above-the-elbow cast or splint to keep incision away from mouth and other hand of the infant or
                                      considerations        child

                                    EBL                     20 mL

                                    Postop care             PACU → home, if simple syndactyly

                                    Mortality               None associated with procedure.

                                    Position                Supine

===== PAGE 1393 =====
Syndactyly Repair     1393

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Morbidity                Partial slough of flaps or skin graft requiring revision
                                              Scarring and some stiffness of fingers
                                              Angulatory deformities late, occasionally depending on degree of involvement of the skeleton
                                                and joint

                    Pain score                1–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 6 mo–5 yr
                    Male:Female               2:1

                     Incidence                1/2000 births (the most common significant congenital hand anomaly)

                     Etiology                 Family Hx (10–40%); failure of differentiation in the 6th–8th wk of intrauterine life

                    Associated                Polydactyly, accessory phalanges; Apert syndrome; Poland syndrome
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Upper-Extremity Procedures, see p. 1393.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bauer TB, Tondra JM, Trusler HM: Technical modification in repair of syndactylism. Plast Reconstr Surg 1956; 17:385–92.
                     2. Chang J, Danton TK, Ladd AL, et al: Reconstruction of the hand in Apert’s syndrome: a simplified approach. Plast Reconstr
                        Surg 2002; 109(2):465–70.
                     3. Ecoffey C: Pediatric regional anesthesia—upper extremity blocks. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 431–4.
                     4. Lammers C, Wyckaert C: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 757–77.
                     5. Oda T, Pushman AG, Chung KC: Treatment of common congenital hand condition. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 126:121e–33e.
                     6. Smith GD: Congenital hand anomalies and reconstruction. Br J Hosp Med (Lond) 2012; 73:203–9.
                     7. Zuckerberg AL, Yaster M: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 842–69.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR UPPER
                        EXTREMITY PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: percutaneous pinning; displaced supracondylar humerus fracture; closed/open
                   reduction; displaced lateral condylar humerus fracture; aspiration/injection unicameral/bone cyst; torticollis

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                    release; pollicization of finger; syndactyly release)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The majority of children presenting for repair of upper-extremity fractures are otherwise healthy. Most of these
                   patients present for repair of a traumatic injury; thus, the preop workup is routine. Some arm procedures, such as
                   repair of a compound fracture, require immediate attention and necessitate emergency surgery and full-stomach
                   considerations (see p. B-5).

                    Laboratory                 Tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication              Standard premedication (see p. D-1).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or LMA because children rarely tolerate regional anesthesia alone. In the older
                   patient, regional anesthesia may be appropriate and can reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonitis associated with

===== PAGE 1394 =====
1394   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   GA in the patient with a full stomach. A combined technique offers the advantages of reduced anesthetic require-
                                   ments and postop pain relief; however, regional anesthesia is relatively contraindicated in patients with neurovascu-
                                   lar damage.
                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                 Standard induction (see p. D-1) except in acute trauma patients, where rapid-sequence
                                                             induction is appropriate (see p. B-5).

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. D-3).

                                   Emergence                 Management of emergence and extubation should be routine, except in difficult airway
                                                             cases, which require awake extubation. Skin closure is frequently followed by application
                                                             of a splint; patient should remain anesthetized during splinting procedure.

                                   Regional anesthesia:
                                   Ultrasound guidance: Ultrasound-guided nerve block techniques are increasingly used in pediatric anesthesia.
                                   The use of ultrasonography increases the ability to position the needle as close to the nerve as possible avoiding inad-
                                   vertent trauma to the adjacent structures. Direct visualization also helps in optimizing the volume and distribution
                                   of the local anesthetic thus improving the safety and efficacy of the block.

                                   Anesthetics and           See Table 12.7-1.
                                     doses

                                   Interscalene               Performed at levels of C6 to minimize risk of pneumothorax. The phrenic nerve lies
                                      block                  a nterior to the brachial plexus and is frequently blocked by anterior spread of LA, leading
                                                              to hemidiaphragm paralysis. This is usually well tolerated; however, care must be taken
                                                              in patients with respiratory compromise. Temporary Horner’s syndrome may result from
                                                              LA migration to sympathetic chain. Major complications (e.g., total spinal or pneumotho-
                                                              rax) resulting from interscalene block are very rare; therefore, this technique is suitable for
                                                              outpatients. Interscalene block is contraindicated in patients with contralateral recurrent
                                                              laryngeal nerve palsy.

                                   Infraclavicular           The infraclavicular approach to brachial plexus block has the advantage of blocking the
                                      block                  axillary and musculocutaneous nerves. The coracoid approach is shown to be safer than the
                                                             classical approach. Use of ultrasonography increases the efficacy and safety of this block.

                                   Axillary block            The medial aspect of the upper arm is innervated by the intercostobrachial nerve (T2) and
                                                             requires a separate subcutaneous field block in the axilla, especially when a tourniquet
                                                             is used. The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm, a sensory branch of the musculo-
                                                             cutaneous nerve supplying sensation to the lateral forearm, is frequently missed by the
                                                             axillary approach to the brachial plexus. Thus, a block of this nerve at the elbow is some-
                                                             times necessary. The maximum recommended doses for local anesthetics are shown in
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                             Table 12.7-1.

                                   Supplemental              Supplemental sedation may be accomplished with use of propofol by continuous infusion
                                     sedation                (50–150 mcg/kg/min).

                                   Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss                              IV catheter should be placed in the contralat-
                                      requirements           IV: 22 ga × 1                                   eral upper extremity.
                                                             NS/LR @ 4-2-1 rule maintenance

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. D-1).

                                   Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                                             3 eyes

===== PAGE 1395 =====
Syndactyly Repair       1395

                     Table 12.7-1. Maximum Recommended Doses of Anesthetics for Regional Anesthesia
                    Drug                                      mg/kg (*with epinephrine)                  Duration (min)
                    Lidocaine                                 5 (*7)                                       45–180
                    Bupivacaine                               2.5 (*3)                                   180–600
                    Ropivacaine                               3                                          180–600
                    Tetracaine                                1.5                                        180–600
                    2-Chloroprocaine                          8 (*10)                                      30–60
                    Procaine                                  8 (*10)                                      60–90

                    Interscalene               Total spinal                                      Resuscitative equipment, including airway
                       block                   Epidural anesthesia                               management tools, and intralipid should be
                       complications           IV injection (Sz/dysrhythmias)                    immediately available. Dose of 20% intra-
                                               Stellate ganglion block (Horner’s                 lipid: 1 mL/kg repeat × 2 max 3 mL/kg; infu-
                                                 syndrome)                                       sion rate 0.25 mL/kg/min.
                                               Laryngeal nerve block
                                               Phrenic nerve block
                                               Pneumothorax

                    Infraclavicular            Hematoma                                          The coracoid approach has reduced risk of
                       block                   Pneumothorax                                      complications.
                       complications           Inadvertent intravascular injection

                    Axillary block             Inadequate block                                  Very minimal doses of local anesthetic can
                      complications            Intravascular injection                           cause CNS toxicity if reverse flow occurs
                                               Peripheral nerve damage                           during an intra-arterial injection. Axillary
                                               Axillary hematoma                                 thrombosis and pneumothorax are extremely
                                               Axillary artery thrombosis                        rare.
                                               Pneumothorax

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain                       PCA (see p. E-4).                         Combined regional-GA provides excellent postop
                      management               Regional block                            pain management.

                    Tests                      None routinely indicated.

                   Suggested Readings                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery
                     1. Ecoffey C: Pediatric regional anesthesia—upper extremity blocks. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 431–4.
                     2. Lammers C, Wyckaert C: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 757–77.
                     3. Marhofer P, Greher M, Kapral S: Ultrasound guidance in regional anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2005; 94(1):7–17.
                     4. Marhofer P, Invani G, Suresh S, Melman E, Zaragoza G, Bosenberg A: Everyday regional anesthesia in children. Pediatr
                        Anesth 2012; 22(10):995–1001.
                     5. Marhofer P, Sitzwohl C, Greher M, et al: Ultrasound guidance for infraclavicular brachial plexus anesthesia in children.
                        Anaesthesia 2004; 59:642–6.
                     6. Surech S, Wheeler M: Practical pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2002; 20(1):83–113.
                     7. Zuckerberg AL, Yaster M: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 842–69.

===== PAGE 1396 =====
1396   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Posterior Spinal Instrumentation and Fusion
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Posterior spinal instrumentation refers to implanted metal rods affixed to the spine to correct and
                                   internally splint the deformed spine. Originally designed for scoliosis, posterior spinal instrumentation is commonly
                                   performed simultaneously with spinal fusion for a variety of diagnoses, including fracture, tumor, degenerative
                                   changes, and developmental spinal deformity. Although posterior spinal instrumentation with the ratcheted Har-
                                   rington rod gained widespread usage in the 1970s, it is no longer used by spinal surgeons. The current standard is
                                   a hook-rod system, such as the Cotrel-Duboussett (C-D), the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital (TSRH), the Miami
                                   Modular Orthopaedic Spinal System (MOSS), and the Universal Spine System (USS). Regardless of the surgeon’s
                                   choice of instrumentation, the spine is approached by an extensive midline posterior incision, in which a subperios-
                                   teal exposure (typically T2-5 down to L1-4) is used to elevate all the paraspinous muscles as far laterally as the tips
                                   of the transverse processes. Typically, 4–8 hooks are affixed to the posterior spinal elements (lamina, pedicles, or
                                   transverse processes) on both the concave and convex sides of the spine (Fig. 12.7-3). These points of spinal fixation
                                   are then joined to two contoured rods. By compressing along the convex surfaces and distracting along the concave
                                   surfaces, some degree of rotational correction is possible. Some spine surgeons advise the patient to wear a brace for
                                   the initial months following surgery; however, body casts are no longer necessary.
                                   Sublaminar wire loops (Fig. 12.7-4) are commonly used instead of the hook-rod method of spinal instrumentation
                                   when treating neuromuscular spinal deformity (e.g., cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, myelomeningocele, or spinal
                                   muscular atrophy). This alternative construct provides more points of fixation to the spine and eliminates the need
                                   for postop bracing. When a large degree of pelvic obliquity is a component of the patient’s deformity, the instrumen-
                                   tation often is extended into the iliac wings (Fig. 12-7.5).
                                   Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) and motor evoked potentials (MEPs) are used routinely in centers
                                   where spinal deformity correction surgery is common. Close coordination among the surgeon, spinal cord monitor-
                                   ing personnel, and anesthesiologist is necessary to properly recognize adverse intraop spinal events and to minimize
                                   the occurrence of false-positive findings. Many spine surgeons also request that an intraop wake-up test be per-
                                   formed to further verify spinal cord function.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                             Figure 12.7-3. Placement of a standard pedicle hook, in a hood-rod device.
                                             (Reproduced with permission from Chapman MW, ed: Operative Orthopaedics,
                                             3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1397 =====
Posterior Spinal Instrumentation and Fusion   1397

                  A                                                    B
                                                                                                 C

                               Figure 12.7-4. An example of passing and attaching sublaminar wires. (Reproduced
                               with permission from Chapman MW, ed: Operative Orthopaedics, 3rd edition.
                               Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery

                              Figure 12.7-5. Positioning rods in pelvis; sublaminar wires being tightened.
                              (Reproduced with permission from Chapman MW, ed: Operative Orthopaedics,
                              3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1398 =====
1398   c h a p t e r 12.7   Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Scoliosis (usually idiopathic or neuromuscular); kyphosis (increased round back); recon-
                                   struction for tumor, trauma, or other

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position              Prone (on spinal frame or bolsters); avoid abdominal, elbow, and ocular compression.
                                    Incision              Posterior midline; optional separate iliac crest bone graft

                                    Special               Rods, hooks, pedicle screws, wires
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                “Wake-up” test and/or SSEPs; frequently, induced ↓ BP is requested; prolonged prone position-
                                      considerations      ing places brachial plexus and ulnar nerve at risk.

                                    Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                    Surgical time         2–6 h

                                    Closing               Greatest blood loss typically toward the end of procedure. Avoid hypotension after instrumenta-
                                      considerations      tion is implanted.

                                    EBL                   1200–3000 mL

                                    Postop care           ICU: 1–2 d

                                    Mortality             0–0.5%

                                    Morbidity             Acute ileus: very common
                                                          Genitourinary infection: 5–7%
                                                          Hematoma, massive bleeding: 1–5%
                                                          Pneumothorax, pneumonia, atelectasis: 1–5%
                                                          Hook dislodgement requiring reoperation: 0–2%
                                                          Wound infection: 0–2%
                                                          Superior mesenteric artery syndrome: 0–1%
                                                          Thromboembolism: < 1%
                                                          Spinal cord injury and/or root injury: 0.6%
                                                          Delayed:
                                                            Pseudarthrosis: 0–5%
                                                            Late rod fracture: 0–5%
                                                            Progression of spinal deformity: 0–2%

                                    Pain score            7–9

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range             Usually 8–40 yr
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Male:Female           1:5

                                    Incidence             1–2/10,000

                                    Etiology              Idiopathic (50–75%); neuromuscular (20–30%); associated with syndromes such as osteochon-
                                                          dral dystrophies, osteogenesis imperfecta, etc. (5%); congenital scoliosis (2–5%)

                                    Associated            Neuromuscular:
                                      conditions            Friedreich’s ataxia (myocarditis and other cardiovascular anomalies; sudden death)
                                                            Myelomeningocele (latex allergy, chronic UTI, hydrocephalus)
                                                           Muscular dystrophy (muscle weakness, cardiomyopathy, dysrhythmias, succinylcholine →
                                                            prolonged muscle contraction, ↑ sensitivity to respiratory depressant effect of barbiturates,
                                                            opiates, and benzodiazepines)
                                                           Cerebral palsy (GERD,↓ airway protective reflexes, ↑ postop pulmonary complications,
                                                            malnourishment, Sz, medication may interfere with Plt function)
                                                             Higher incidence of MH
                                                          Connective tissue disease:
                                                           Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan syndromes (avoid ↑ BP → aortic dissection; ↑ risk of pneumothorax).
                                                             Osteogenesis imperfecta (position and intubate with great care).
                                                             Congenital osteochondral dystrophies

===== PAGE 1399 =====
Anterior Spinal Fusion for Scoliosis          1399

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion, (see p. 997).
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Abu-Kishk I, Kozer E, Hod-Feins R, et al: Pediatric scoliosis surgery—is postoperative intensive care unit admission really
                        necessary? Paediatr Anaesth 2013; 23:271–7.
                     2. Auerbach JD, Lonner BS, Antonacci MD, et al: Perioperative outcomes and complications related to teaching residents and
                        fellows in scoliosis surgery. Spine 2008; 33(10):1113–8.
                     3. Borgeat A, Blumenthal S: Postoperative pain management following scoliosis surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008; 21(3): 313–6.
                     4. Heller KD, Wirtz DC, Siebert CH, et al: Spinal stabilization in Duchenne muscular dystrophy: principles of treatment and
                        record of 31 operative treated cases. J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 10(1):18–24.
                     5. Mathieseen O, Dahl B, Thomsen BA, et al: A comprehensive multimodal pain treatment reduce opioid consumption after
                        multilevel spine surgery. Eur Spine J 2013; 22(9):2089–96.
                     6. Rusy LM, Hainsworth KR, Nelson TJ, et al: Gabepentin use in pediatric spinal fusion patients: a randomized, double-blind,
                        controlled trial. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(5):1393–8.
                     7. Thomson JD, Banta JV: Scoliosis in cerebral palsy: an overview and recent results. J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 10(1):6–9.
                     8. Torre-Healy A, Samdani AF: Newer technologies for the treatment of scoliosis in the growing spine. Neurosurg Clin N Am
                        2007; 18(4):697–705.

                   Anterior Spinal Fusion for Scoliosis
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Anterior spinal fusion is performed through a transthoracic and/or retroperitoneal approach to the
                   vertebral bodies, in which the intervertebral discs are removed and a bone graft is placed between the vertebral
                   bodies. The disc removal (“release”) loosens the spine and allows greater deformity correction than posterior-only
                   procedures. Often, no instrumentation is used anteriorly when the anterior fusion is performed as a first stage to a
                   “front-and-back” fusion. (In such cases, posterior spinal instru-
                   mentation is subsequently implanted to correct the spinal defor-
                   mity.) Anterior spinal instrumentation is performed when a pos-
                   terior spinal fusion is not needed (e.g., idiopathic thoracolumbar
                   or lumbar scoliosis).
                   When instrumentation of the anterior spine is performed, the
                   surgical approach is through a flank incision, then through a rib
                   bed on the convex side of the curve (usually the 10th rib). The
                   retroperitoneal plane is entered and developed by blunt dissec-

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                   tion behind the transversus abdominis muscle. The pleural cavity
                   is entered, and the diaphragm usually must be divided circumfer-
                   entially near its costal origin and around posteriorly to the spine.
                   The prevertebral areolar plane is then entered and the segmental
                   vessels to each vertebral body are clipped or cauterized in the
                   midline. The psoas muscle is elevated off the lateral aspects of the
                   vertebral bodies. Each disc in the fusion area (usually 3–5 discs) is
                   excised back to the posterior longitudinal ligament. Next, verte-
                   bral screws (e.g., Texas Scottish Rite Hospital [TSRH], Miami
                   Modular Orthopaedic Spine System [MOSS], Universal Spine
                   System [USS] instrumentation) are inserted transversely across
                   the appropriate bodies and joined at their heads by a rod (Figs.               Figure 12.7-6. Dwyer instrumentation
                   12.7-6 and 12.7-7). Bone graft (typically from the rib harvested               used to make spinal correction.
                   during the surgical approach) is placed within each discecto-                  (Reproduced with permission from
                   my level. A chest tube is placed before closure of the thoracic                Crenshaw AH, ed: Campbell’s Operative
                   cavity.
                                                                                                  Orthopaedics, 8th edition. Mosby-Year
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Idiopathic or neuromuscular scoliosis                   Book, St. Louis: 1992.)

===== PAGE 1400 =====
1400   c h a p t e r 12.7   Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                               Figure 12.7-7. Instrumentation from T10-L3 (Zielke). (Reproduced with permission
                                               from Chapman MW, ed: Operative Orthopaedics, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                               Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                           Fusion with Instrumentation                        Release (No Instrumentation)
                                    Position               Full lateral decubitus (Fig. 12.7-8)               ⇐

                                    Incision               Flank: over rib at top vertebra in the curve       ⇐
                                                           (usually T9–T11)

                                    Special                Screws, staples, rods                              None
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                 Flex OR table at thoracolumbar junction until      ⇐ Uninstrumented release is always followed
                                      considerations       disc removal and deformity correction. Proce-      by posterior spinal fusion with instrumentation.
                                                           dure often followed by posterior spinal fusion.
                                                           Proximity of great vessels → potential for major
                                                           bleeding. Patients with neuromuscular scoliosis
                                                           often have poor generalized nutrition. SSEP/
                                                           MEP often used to monitor spinal cord function.

                                    Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                              ⇐

                                    Surgical time          3–4 h                                              2–3 h

                                    Closing                Chest tube always used; hypotension, if used       ⇐
                                      considerations       electively, must be reversed before closure.

                                    EBL                    500–2000 mL                                        250–2000 mL

                                    Postop care            ICU 1–2 d                                          ⇐

                                    Mortality              0–2%, depending on underlying conditions           ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Morbidity              Overall: 30%, depending on underlying              20%
                                                              condition
                                                           Ileus and atelectasis: ~50%                        ⇐
                                                           UTI: 10–25% (common in spina bifida)               ⇐
                                                           Minor transient root weakness or                   1–5%
                                                              paraesthesia: 10–20%
                                                           Partial sympathectomy: common                      ⇐
                                                           Late kyphosis above instrumentation: 5–10%         –
                                                           Nonunion and hardware failure: 5%                  –
                                                           Massive blood loss: 2–5%                           ⇐
                                                           Respiratory failure: 1–2%                          ⇐
                                                           Pneumonia: 1%                                      ⇐
                                                           Paraplegia (acute anterior spinal artery           ⇐
                                                              syndrome): < 1%
                                                           Thromboembolism: rare (< 5% in children)           ⇐

                                    Pain score             5–8                                                4–7

===== PAGE 1401 =====
Pelvic Osteotomy       1401

                   A                                                                                                          B

                                Figure 12.7-8. Lateral decubitus position (diagrammatic) for anterior spinal
                                procedures: (A) anterior view; (B) posterior view. Roll is placed under axilla to
                                minimize axillary artery compression. Skin incision for exposure of T5–T12 is shown
                                with the dotted line. (Reproduced with permission from Chapman MW, ed: Operative
                                Orthopaedics, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 5–35 yr
                    Male:Female               Idiopathic: 1:10
                                              Neuromuscular: 1:1

                     Incidence                < 1/10,000

                     Etiology                 Idiopathic scoliosis; neuromuscular disease (especially cerebral palsy, spina bifida, polio, myopa-
                                              thies, muscular dystrophies); other genetic bone dysplasias; Marfan syndrome

                    Associated                See Associated Conditions for Posterior Spinal Instrumentation and Fusion, p. 1396.
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Spinal Reconstruction and Fusion, (see p. 997).
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Betz RR, Shufflebarger H: Anterior versus posterior instrumentation for the correction of thoracic idiopathic scoliosis. Spine
                        2001; 26(9):1095–100.

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                     2. Rusy LM, Hainsworth KR, Nelson TJ, et al: Gabapentin use in pediatric spinal fusion patients: a randomized, double-blind,
                        controlled trial. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(5):1393–8.

                   Pelvic Osteotomy
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pelvic osteotomy is used to improve hip instability in cases of developmental hip dysplasia. The pur-
                   pose of the procedure is to improve the coverage of the femoral head and stimulate appropriate growth of the shallow
                   acetabulum. It is frequently performed in conjunction with open reduction and occasionally with femoral osteotomy.

===== PAGE 1402 =====
1402   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                               Figure 12.7-9. Pemberton osteotomy: A triangular graft is cut from the proximal
                                               ilium, and the graft is carefully wedged into the osteotomy site. (Reproduced with
                                               permission from Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition.
                                               Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                   The surgical approach is made along the iliac crest, exposing the external (gluteal) surface of the iliac bone and some-
                                   times the internal (iliac) surface as well. The pelvis is osteotomized closely above the acetabulum and sometimes
                                   through the pubis and ischium, depending on the direction of rotation and reorientation desired. Pelvic osteotomies
                                   either reorient an intact acetabular hyaline cartilage surface or are designed as salvage procedures to enlarge the
                                   acetabulum by fibrocartilage metaplasia (see Acetabular Augmentation and Chiari, p. 1404). Salter’s innominate
                                   osteotomy is the classic reorientation osteotomy, in which a complete cut of the supra-acetabular iliac bone allows
                                   rotation through the symphysis pubis. Pemberton’s operation is a slightly more difficult incomplete iliac osteotomy,
                                   rotating on the triradius cartilage (Fig. 12.7-9), which is at the center of the acetabulum in young children. The Steel,
                                   “Dial” or Eppright osteotomies are the most difficult reorientation procedures. In each, the acetabulum is freed
                                   totally from any bony contact with the remainder of the pelvis and rotated into better position.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acetabular dysplasia due to congenital or developmental hip dislocation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                             Salter                             Pemberton                    Steel, Dial
                                    Position                 Supine or slightly lateral         ⇐                            ⇐

                                    Incision                 Oblique or longitudinal anterior   ⇐                            ⇐
                                                             hip

                                    Special                  Steinmann pins                     Special curved, custom       Steinmann pins
                                      instrumentation                                           osteotomes

                                    Unique                   Frequently follows previous        ⇐                            ⇐ + additional ischial incision
                                      considerations         unsuccessful open hip surgery.

                                    Antibiotics              Usually, cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv     ⇐                            ⇐

                                    Surgical time            1.5–2 h                            2–3 h                        2–4 h

===== PAGE 1403 =====
Pelvic Osteotomy        1403

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                      Salter                                         Pemberton                   Steel, Dial
                    Closing considerations            Hip spica                                      ⇐                           ⇐
                    EBL                               100–300 mL                                     ⇐                           200–600 mL
                    Postop care                       PACU → room; care as needed                    ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      for spica cast
                    Mortality                         Minimal                                        ⇐                           ⇐
                    Morbidity                         Avascular necrosis of the hip:                 –                           –
                                                         5–6%
                                                      Persistent hip subluxation: 5%                 ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Infection: 1%                                  ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Sciatic or perineal palsy:                     ⇐                           ⇐
                                                         <0.1%
                                                      Excess bleeding from superior                  ⇐                           Occasional
                                                         gluteal artery: Rare
                                                      Ileus: Rare                                    ⇐                           Occasional
                    Pain score                        2–5                                            2–5                         3–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                         18 mo–6 yr, if dislocated                      18 mo–7 yr                  12 yr
                                                      18 mo–10 yr, if only
                                                        subluxated
                    Male:Female                       1:2                                            ⇐                           ⇐

                     Incidence                        1/10,000                                       1/10,000                    1/10,000

                     Etiology                         Congenital and/or develop-                     ⇐                           ⇐
                                                        mental hip dysplasia: 98%
                                                      Perthes disease: 1%
                    Associated conditions             Torticollis: < 1%                              ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Other joint contractures in                    ⇐                           ⇐
                                                        cases of neuromuscular
                                                        dislocation: <1%

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Pogliacomi F, De Filippo M, Costantino C, et al: 2006: the value of pelvic and femoral osteotomies in hip surgery. Acta Biomed
                        2007; 78(1):60–70.
                     2. Sanchez-Sotelo J, Trousdale RT, Berry DJ, et al: Surgical treatment of developmental dysplasia of the hip in adults: I.
                        Nonarthroplasty options. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2002; 10(5):321–33.
                     3. Vitale MG, Skaggs DL: Developmental dysplasia of the hip from six months to four years of age. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
                        2001; 9(6):401–11.

===== PAGE 1404 =====
1404   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Acetabular Augmentation (Shelf) & Chiari
                                   Osteotomy
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Acetabular augmentation is a “salvage” procedure used to deepen the hip socket when a realignment
                                   osteotomy of the pelvis and/or femur would not adequately cover the femoral head. This is accomplished by securing
                                   strips of cortical cancellous bone graft onto the proximal surface of the hip capsule. The surgical approach is anterior
                                   to the hip, elevating the gluteal muscles subperiosteally from the outer surface of the ilium. The reflected head of the
                                   rectus femoris tendon is elevated, and a domed-shaped slot is created just above the capsular attachment to the ilium.
                                   Abundant cortical cancellous strips of bone graft are then harvested from the upper two-thirds of the outer wall of
                                   the ilium. These bone grafts have a natural curve and lie on the convexity of the hip capsule. No internal fixation,
                                   other than suture repair, is used to hold the bone graft in place. This creates a large bony augmentation (shelf ) over
                                   the uncovered femoral capsule.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: The bone graft may be taken as a large, sculpted, solitary, cortical cancellous
                                   strut or wedge, or more commonly, as curved “shavings” anchored in a dome-shaped slot just above the hip capsule.
                                   In the Chiari procedure, a complete dome-shaped osteotomy allows lateral displacement of the ilium just above
                                   the proximal hip capsule (Fig. 12.7-10). The line of the osteotomy corresponds more or less with the slot of the shelf
                                   procedure. In either case, the result is abundant bony coverage over the hip capsule, which undergoes metaplasia
                                   into fibrocartilage.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acetabular dysplasia (shallow socket) due to congenital hip dislocation or developmental
                                   neurologic subluxation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Acetabular Augmentation                               Chiari Osteotomy
                                    Position                Supine or slightly tilted up (reverse                 ⇐ or lateral decubitus
                                                            Trendelenburg)

                                    Incision                Oblique or longitudinal; anterior hip region          ⇐

                                    Special                 Usually no internal fixation; I.I. or intraop x-ray   Two large screws or pins; I.I. or intraop x-ray
                                      instrumentation

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                                 ⇐
        Pediatric Surgery

                                          A                                                                  B

                                               Figure 12.7-10. Chiari osteotomy: A: Line of osteotomy. B: Completed osteotomy.
                                               (Reproduced with permission from Crenshaw AH, ed: Campbell’s Operative
                                               Orthopaedics, 8th edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1992.)

===== PAGE 1405 =====
Ober Fasciotomy, Yount-Ober Release            1405

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Acetabular Augmentation                           Chiari Osteotomy

                     Surgical time           1.5–3 h                                           ⇐

                     Closing                 Unilateral or 1.5 spica cast mandatory            Spica cast (optional)
                       considerations

                     EBL                     100–500 mL                                        200–800 mL

                     Postop care             PACU → room. Care as necessary for cast.          ⇐

                     Mortality               Minimal                                           ⇐

                     Morbidity               Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve dysfunction:      Sciatic or peroneal palsy: 2%
                                             30–50%                                            Possible need for later C-section: Rare
                                             Infection: 1%

                    Pain score               4–6                                               4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                6–35 yr
                    Male:Female              1:1.5

                     Incidence               < 1/10,000 in general population; in neuromuscular population (e.g., cerebral palsy, poliomyeli-
                                             tis residuals): 5–10%

                     Etiology                Neuromuscular hip subluxation with shallow acetabulum; residual shallow acetabulum (poor cov-
                                             erage from congenitally dislocated hip)

                    Associated               Cerebral palsy; polio; spina bifida; myopathy; congenital atrophies; Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Betz RR, Kumar Si, Palmer CT, et al: Chiari pelvic osteotomy in children and young adults. J Bone Joint Surg 1988; 70(2):
                        182–91.
                     2. Fong HC, Lu W, Li YH, et al: Chiari osteotomy and shelf augmentation in the treatment of hip dysplasia. J Pediatr Orthop

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                        2000; 20(6):740–4.
                     3. Piontek T, Szulc A, Gowacki M, et al: Distant outcomes of the Chiari osteotomy 30 years follow up evaluation. Orthop
                        Traumatol Rehabil 2006; 8(1):16–23.
                     4. Summers BN, Turner A, Wynn-Jones CH: The shelf operation in the management of late presentation of congenital hip
                        dysplasia. J Bone Joint Surg 1988; 70(1):63–8.
                     5. Zuckerman JD, Staheli LT, McLaughlin JF: Acetabular augmentation for progressive hip subluxation in cerebral palsy.
                        J Pediatr Orthop 1984; 4(4):436–42.

                   Ober Fasciotomy, Yount-Ober Release
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ober’s fasciotomy is performed to release flexion, abduction, and external rotation contracture at the
                   hip. This contracture usually occurs as a result of profound flaccid paralysis → prolonged positioning in a so-called

===== PAGE 1406 =====
1406   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   frog position of 90° flexion, abduction, and lateral rotation at the hips. This results in tightening of the iliotibial
                                   (IT) band (the greatly thickened lateral aspect of the fascia lata) and related structures. The operation is performed
                                   through an anterolateral incision just distal to the iliac crest. All of the fascial investments of the tensor, sartorius,
                                   and, at times, the rectus femoris and gluteus medias and minimus are divided, while preserving any normal-appear-
                                   ing muscle fibers. The limb is stretched into progressively more adduction and extension, until a neutral position can
                                   be obtained. The Yount procedure is added when the knee also is contracted in a flexed mode due to tightness of the
                                   IT band. The Yount procedure consists of further resection of a segment of the IT band and a lateral intermuscular
                                   septum through a separate distal midlateral longitudinal incision just above the knee. An oblique segment of the IT
                                   band and septum are removed and not repaired.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Flaccid paralysis and “frog”-type contracture due to poliomyelitis, myelomeningocele, or
                                   myopathy

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Ober Fasciotomy                                                Yount-Ober Release
                                    Position                 Supine; both legs must be prepped and draped to well           ⇐
                                                             above the iliac crest area for intraop stretching.

                                    Incision                 Oblique iliac crest                                            Midlateral longitudinal above
                                                                                                                            knee joint, ~10 cm

                                    Unique                   Patients with sensory and motor loss have a tendency to        ⇐
                                      considerations         get pressure sores.

                                    Antibiotics              Usually none                                                   ⇐

                                    Surgical time            1 h/side                                                       30 min/side

                                    Closing                  Bilateral above-knee casts                                     ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      < 150 mL                                                       < 50 mL

                                    Postop care              PACU → room; extensive physical therapy program of             ⇐
                                                             stretching exercises. Myopathic patients at risk for postop
                                                             respiratory compromise.

                                    Mortality                Minimal                                                        ⇐

                                    Morbidity                Hematoma: ~1%                                                  ⇐
                                                             Fracture of atrophied bone postop: < 1%                        ⇐
                                                             Infection < 1%                                                 ⇐
                                                             Pressure sores from positioning or casts: < 1%                 ⇐
                                    Pain score               3–4                                                            3–4
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                2–15 yr

                                    Male:Female              1:1

                                    Incidence                Extremely rare in children born in the United States; however, polio is seen commonly in south-
                                                             east Asian and Latin-American immigrants.

                                    Etiology                 Polio; myelomeningocele; myopathy or dystrophy

                                    Associated               Other contractures; incontinence; pressure sores in myelomeningocele
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

===== PAGE 1407 =====
Hip, Open Reduction & Femoral Shortening                 1407

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Irwin CE: The iliotibial band, its role in producing deformity in poliomyelitis. J Bone Joint Surg 1949; 31:141–52.
                     2. Ober FR: The role of the iliotibial band and fascia lata as a factor in the causation of low-back disabilities and sciatica. J Bone
                        Joint Surg 1936; 18:105–19.

                   Hip, Open Reduction & Femoral Shortening
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Open reduction of the hip replaces a dislocated femoral head into the anatomic acetabulum, at times
                   after an unsuccessful attempt to reduce the hip by closed means. A developmental dislocation presents with a more
                   normal acetabulum and occurs around birth or later. A teratologic congenital dislocation of the hip occurs early in
                   utero and, as a result, has a high-riding dislocation with a poorly developed acetabulum, presenting much more dif-
                   ficulty in obtaining and maintaining reduction. The most common surgical approach is through an extended anterior
                   incision. The hip capsule is exposed circumferentially, after division and tagging of the origins of the rectus, femoris,
                   and sartorius muscles and retraction of the tensor and gluteal muscles. The iliopsoas tendon is either lengthened or
                   divided. The capsule is opened in an oblique fashion, the ligamentum teres is excised, and any obstacle to reduction
                   is removed. The femoral head is replaced in the socket, and the capsule is repaired in a “vest-over-pants” imbrication,
                   with the hip reduced under direct visualization (Fig. 12.7-11). A medial approach through the adductor region can
                   be used in very young children (< 18 mo) but does not allow a capsular repair. If femoral shortening is necessary,
                   the surgical excision is either extended anterolaterally or a separate lateral incision is made longitudinally over the
                   proximal femur.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Most children < 2 yr old can simply have the hip repositioned—closed or
                   open—and subsequently have normal hip development. In older children, especially with a high dislocation, a seg-
                   ment of the femur is removed subtrochanterically to allow reduction without pressure (thus allowing “descent” of the
                   femoral head). If the acetabulum is very shallow, a pelvic osteotomy may be added.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Developmental dislocation of hip; teratologic congenital dislocation of hip

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                               Open Reduction                                         Open Reduction + Femoral Shortening
                    Position                   Supine                                                 ⇐

                     Incision                  Oblique (“bikini”) along the iliac crest or medial     ⇐ + anterolateral thigh over joint
                                               longitudinal over joint

                                                                                                                                                                      Pediatric Surgery
                    Special                    None                                                   Plates and screws
                      instrumentation
                    Unique                     Preliminary arthrogram and, often, attempted           ⇐
                      considerations           closed reduction. I.I. is used.
                    Antibiotics                Usually cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                          ⇐
                    Surgical time              1.5–3 h                                                2–4 h
                    Closing                    Hip spica cast applied on child’s spica frame.         ⇐
                      considerations           NB: Do not wake patient until last radiograph
                                               is taken, in case cast has to be reapplied.
                    EBL                        < 100 mL                                               100–400 mL
                    Postop care                PACU → room; care as necessary for spica               ⇐
                                               cast
                    Mortality                  Minimal                                                ⇐

===== PAGE 1408 =====
1408   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                               Figure 12.7-11. Open reduction with femoral shortening. (Reproduced with
                                               permission from Crenshaw AH, ed: Campbell’s Operative Orthopaedics, 8th edition
                                               Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1992.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                             Open Reduction                                     Open Reduction + Femoral Shortening
                                    Morbidity                Avascular necrosis of femoral head                 ⇐
                                                             Stiffness and late arthritis                       ⇐
                                                             Limb length discrepancy                            ⇐
                                                             Marked scrotal or labial swelling: temporary       ⇐
                                                             Redislocation                                      ⇐
                                                             Infection                                          ⇐
                                    Pain score               2–4                                                3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                Closed reduction: 3 mo–3 yr
                                                             Open reduction: 6 mo–10 yr
                                                             Open reduction femoral shortening: 2–14 yr
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Male:Female              1:5 (approximate)

                                    Incidence                1:10,000

                                    Etiology                 Genetic background; breech presentation; firstborn girl

                                    Associated               Arthrogryposis; Larsen’s disease; myelomeningocele; chromosomal anomalies; congenital torticol-
                                      conditions             lis; cerebral palsy

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Hogan KA, Blake M, Gross RH: Subtrochanteric valgus osteotomy for chronically dislocated, painful spastic hips. Surgical
                                        technique. J Bone Joint Surg 2007; 89(Suppl 2):226–31.
                                     2. Moseley CF: Developmental hip dysplasia and dislocation: management of the older child. Instr Course Lect 2001; 50:547–53.
                                     3. Wenger, DR, Lee CS, Kolman B: Derotational femoral shortening for developmental dislocation of the hip: special indications
                                        and results in the child younger than 2 years. J Pediatr Orthop 1995; 15(6):768–79.

===== PAGE 1409 =====
Adductor Release or Transfer, Psoas Release        1409

                   Adductor Release or Transfer, Psoas Release
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The adductor tendons and often the iliopsoas tendon are released in spastic and other neurologic con-
                   ditions (especially cerebral palsy). The goal is to allow greater abduction by decreasing the strength of the adductors
                   and flexors. The releases are also performed for other causes of hip contracture due to developmental hip dislocation,
                   juvenile arthritis, etc. The procedure is performed with the patient supine, using a medial groin incision in which the
                   tendons (usually the adductor longus, brevis, and gracilis) are isolated and divided by electrocautery. In the classic
                   procedure, popularized by Banks and Green, the anterior branch of the obturator nerve is divided on the surface of
                   the adductor brevis to affect more permanent adductor weakness. This procedure is now less popular because the
                   denervated muscles can undergo denervation fibrosis resulting in recurrent contracture. The iliopsoas tendon may
                   be released at its insertion on the lesser trochanter, in the base of the adductor incision; or just the tendinous por-
                   tion of the combined iliopsoas may be released at the pelvic rim, which produces a more modest degree of the flexor
                   lengthening. Some surgeons transfer the adductor longus and gracilis muscles proximally and laterally, suturing
                   them to the ischium to convert the adductors to hip extensors by changing their mechanics.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Adduction and flexion contracture of the hip with subluxation due to cerebral palsy, ac-
                   quired encephalopathy, or progressive neurologic disorder.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Adductor Release                                      Adductor Transfer         Psoas Release
                    Position                Supine                                                Supine or lithotomy       ⇐

                     Incision               Medial proximal groin, longitudinal or transverse     Transverse medial         Anterior groin
                                                                                                  groin

                     Unique                 Frequently bilateral; often poor hygiene, especial-   ⇐                         ⇐
                       considerations       ly if severe contracture; proximity to perineum

                     Antibiotics            ± cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                               ⇐                         ⇐

                     Surgical time          1h                                                    1.5 h                     1h

                     Closing                Bilateral leg casts or double spica cast              ⇐                         ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                    < 100 mL                                              ⇐                         ⇐

                     Postop care            PACU → room; care as necessary for spica cast         ⇐                         ⇐

                     Mortality              Minimal                                               ⇐                         ⇐

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                    Morbidity               Hematoma, drainage                                    ⇐                         ⇐
                                            Infection: < 1%                                       ⇐                         ⇐
                                            Recurrence of adduction deformity
                    Pain score              2–4                                                   2–4                       2–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range               2–20 yr
                    Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence              0 in general population; 30% of cerebral palsy patients (0.6–5.9/1000)

                     Etiology               Cerebral palsy (90%); slowly progressive degenerative neurologic conditions (8–10%); head injury
                                            and drowning (1–2%)

                    Associated              Multiple other contractures; GERD; poor general nutrition; mental retardation
                      conditions

===== PAGE 1410 =====
1410   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. El Hage S, Rachkidi R, Noun Z, et al: Is percutaneous adductor tenotomy as effective and safe as the open procedure?
                                        J Pediatr Orthop 2010; 30:485–8.
                                     2. Presedo A, Oh CW, Dabney KW, et al: Soft-tissue releases to treat spastic hip subluxation in children with cerebral palsy.
                                        J Bone Joint Surg 2005; 87:832–41.
                                     3. Reimers J, Poulsen S: Adductor transfer versus tenotomy for stability of the hip in spastic cerebral palsy. J Pediatr Orthop
                                        1984; 4(1):52–4.
                                     4. Rinsky LA: Surgery for cerebral palsy. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott
                                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 4485–504.

                                   Pinning Of Slipped Capital Femoral
                                   Epiphysis (Scfe)
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Slipped capital femoral epiphysis is a mechanical failure of the proximal femoral growth plate. During
                                   the rapid growth period, the shearing stress of the body weight on the proximal femoral growth plate may cause the
                                   femoral head (capital epiphysis) to gradually move relative to the femoral neck through the physis or growth carti-
                                   lage. The displacement occurs over weeks to months, with the head appearing to move posteriorly and inferiorly on
                                   the neck. Percutaneous in situ pinning (no reduction) is the most common treatment. The goal is to prevent further
                                   slipping and subsequent arthritis by causing closure of the growth plate. The procedure must be performed under
                                   radiographic control (usually I.I.), using a variety of threaded pins or screws, which are passed through the neck into
                                   the femoral head. Currently, the favored technique uses one cannulated screw, which is passed percutaneously over
                                   a guide wire from the anterolateral aspect of the proximal femur.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Although most slips are chronic, occasionally following mild trauma, an acute
                                   slip will supervene. Following severe trauma, a previously normal hip with an open physis (growth plate) may suf-
                                   fer an acute displacement. In such acute slips, some degree of reduction may be possible, and two pins are usually
                                   necessary. Because pin-related complications are common, some surgeons prefer to close the growth plate by open
                                   drilling and curettement, with bone grafting across the cartilaginous plates. This is performed through an anterior
                                   incision, opening the hip capsule widely from an oblique groin incision. No pins are used, but an iliac bone graft is
                                   placed across the physis. A body spica cast is frequently needed. After the physis is closed, if there is severe residual
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   deformity, a corrective osteotomy is performed in the trochanteric region (see Proximal Femoral Osteotomy, South-
                                   wick Procedure, p. 1414).
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acute or chronic SCFE

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Pinning of SCFE                                    Variant Open Epiphysiodesis
                                    Position                  Supine                                             ⇐

                                    Incision                  Short, proximal thigh or stab incision             Anterolateral groin

                                    Special                   Guide wires; cannulated screws; I.I.; fracture     I.I. (recommended)
                                      instrumentation         table

                                    Unique                    Frequently bilateral (≤ 20%); often obese          ⇐
                                      considerations

===== PAGE 1411 =====
Pinning of Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis (Scfe)              1411

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                              Pinning of SCFE                                   Variant Open Epiphysiodesis

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv                                  ⇐

                     Surgical time            0.5–2 h                                           1–3 h

                    Closing                   None                                              Frequently needs spica cast
                      considerations
                    EBL                       Negligible                                        200–500 mL
                    Postop care               PACU → room                                       Body spica cast, occasionally
                    Mortality                 Minimal                                           ⇐
                    Morbidity                 Unsuspected pin penetration: ≤ 37%                ⇐
                                              Avascular necrosis: ≤ 33% (in acute slip          ⇐
                                                 cases)
                                              Chondrolysis, hip stiffness: 1–28%                ⇐
                                              Fracture after pin removal : <1%                  ⇐
                                              Infection: < 1%
                    Pain score                2–3                                               2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 10–16 yr

                    Male:Female               2–3:1

                     Incidence                1–3/100,000 (higher in African Americans)

                    Etiology                  Excessive loading of the growth plate (obesity or increased angle of inclination of the physis)
                                              Insufficient tensile strength of collagen and proteoglycans around the femoral neck
                                              Increased thickness of the physis as from excessive growth hormone, hypogonadism, hypothy-
                                                 roidism, hyperparathyroidism, renal osteodystrophy, almost any other significant endocrinopathy
                                              Radiation therapy
                    Associated                Obesity; endocrinopathies; renal osteodystrophy
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Aadalen RJ, Weiner DS, Hoyt W, et al: Acute slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Bone Joint Surg; 1974; 56(7):1473–87.
                     2. Aronsson DD, Loder RT, Breur GJ, et al: Slipped capital femoral epiphysis: current concepts. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
                        2006; 14:666–79.
                     3. Dobbs MB, Weinstein SL: Natural history and long-term outcomes of slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Instr Course Lect
                        2001; 50:571–5.
                     4. Lee FY, Chapman CB: In situ pinning of hip for stable slipped capital femoral epiphysis on a radiolucent operating table.
                        J Pediatr Orthop 2003; 23(1):27–9.
                     5. Loder RT: Unstable slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 21(5):694–9.
                     6. Novais EN, Millis MB: Slipped capital femoral epiphysis: prevalence, pathogenesis, and natural history. Clin Orthop Related
                        Res 2012; 470:3432–8.

===== PAGE 1412 =====
1412   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Flexible Intramedullary Nailing of Long-Bone
                                   Fractures
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: The purpose of flexible nailing of long bones is to obtain stability with minimal surgical risk.
                                   This method is applicable to both lower- and upper-extremity fractures. Casting is unnecessary in many cases
                                   because of the balanced dynamic forces exerted by the elastic memory of the implanted precontoured nails. This
                                    is particularly appealing when treating femur fractures that otherwise would require spica casting and prolonged
                                    immobility. This technique results in a high rate of fracture union, promoted by the implant load-sharing char-
                                    acteristics with a modulus of elasticity that is close to bone, thereby avoiding stress shielding. The flexible nailing
                                    technique for treatment of femur fractures in children also avoids the risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral
                                    head because of a more distal entry point on the bone, compared to standard rigid intramedullary nails that enter
                                    the medullary canal at the base of the femoral neck, where the primary vascular supply to the femoral head is
                                    located.
                                   The child is placed supine on a radiolucent operating table, although some surgeons prefer to use a fracture
                                   table when treating femur fractures with this method. The surgeon performs a closed reduction of the fracture
                                   with fluoroscopy assistance, proceeding to an open incision and reduction only if an acceptable fracture reduc-
                                   tion cannot be achieved with closed techniques. After the fracture is aligned, a small incision for each nail is
                                   made on the extremity proximal to the physis at the knee. A drill is used to create an entry point in the cortex
                                   of the bone, and each nail is contoured before insertion through this entry point. No intramedullary reaming is
                                   performed before nail insertion. The rare need for cast application is judged by intraop imaging for rotational
                                   and angular stability.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fracture
        Pediatric Surgery

                                          A                                                B                                            C

                                              Figure 12.7-12. Intramedullary nailing. A: Nail entry site through greater trochanter
                                              (antegrade) or distal metaphysic (retrograde). B: Nails are contoured before insertion.
                                              C: Fracture stabilized with two antegrade nails. (Reproduced with permission from
                                              Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                              Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 1413 =====
Flexible Intramedullary Nailing of Long-Bone Fractures          1413

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Closed Reduction                                        Open Reduction
                    Position                  Supine; may be performed on fracture table if           ⇐
                                              femoral.

                     Incision                 2–3 cm at entry site for each nail                      Incision at fracture site and 2–3 cm at
                                                                                                      entry site for each nail

                     Instrumentation          Intramedullary nails, power drill, I.I.                 ⇐

                     Unique                   Blood loss from fracture; muscle relaxation may         ⇐
                       considerations         be necessary to obtain reduction.

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 25 mg/kg                                      ⇐

                     Surgical time            45–60 min                                               60–90 min

                     Closing                  May supplement with cast.                               ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                      Minimal                                                 50–200 mL

                     Postoperative care       PACU → room                                             ⇐

                     Mortality                Rare, except in multitrauma                             ⇐

                    Morbidity                 Nonunion, malunion                                      ⇐
                                              Shortening                                              ⇐
                                              Infection                                               ⇐
                                              Painful instrumentation                                 ⇐
                    Pain score                4–7                                                     4–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 6–14 yr
                    Male:Female               2.6:1

                     Incidence                19/100,000 for femoral shaft

                     Etiology                 Trauma

                    Associated                Usually normal, healthy child
                      conditions

                                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Kocher MS, Sink EL, Blasier RD, et al: Treatment of pediatric diaphyseal femur fractures. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
                        2009; 17:718–25.
                     2. Rathjen KE, Riccio AI, De La Garza D: Stainless steel flexible intramedullary fixation of unstable femoral shaft fractures in
                        children. J Pediatr Orthop 2007; 27:432–41.
                     3. Vrsansky P, Bourdelat D, Al Faour: Flexible stable intramedullary pinning technique in the treatment of pediatric fractures.
                        J Pediatr Orthop 2000; 20(1):23–7.

===== PAGE 1414 =====
1414   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Proximal Femoral Osteotomy
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Femoral osteotomy is performed in the inter- or subtrochanteric area to redirect the femoral head
                                   more superiorly (valgus) or inferiorly (varus) and/or for rotational correction of excessive medial/femoral torsion
                                   (anteversion). A plate and screws are commonly used, but an external fixator and/or spica cast may be placed
                                   instead. The usual surgical approach is direct lateral over the proximal shaft of the femur, beginning at the greater
                                   trochanter. The deep fascia is split, and the underlying vastus muscle is elevated subperiosteally to expose the femoral
                                   shaft. Normally, a power saw is used to make the osteotomy, and depending on the correction desired, a variety of
                                   internal fixation devices can be used.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Different named plates (e.g., AO blade, Coventry screw, Richards screw,
                                   Wagner) may be used to affix the proximal to the distal femoral segments. A 1- to 4-cm segment of femur may be
                                    removed in cases of superior hip dislocation to allow soft tissue relaxation and descent of the femoral head into the
                                    socket. Most proximal femoral osteotomies are performed in the subtrochanteric area, but some are performed in
                                    the intertrochanteric or base of the neck (Kramer compensating). The Southwick osteotomy is a more complicated
                                    example of a subtrochanteric osteotomy, which corrects for three directions (varus, lateral rotation, and extension).
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Developmental hip subluxation; excessive hip anteversion; residual deformity from Perthes
                                   disease; coxa vara; slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE); residual deformity

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Varus Derotation Osteotomy +
                                                            Plate and Screws                             External Fixator             Southwick or Kramer
                                    Position                Supine                                       ⇐                            ⇐

                                    Incision                Lateral thigh or, occasionally, long         ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            anterior thigh

                                    Special                 Plate and screws; power drill and            External fixator; multiple   Plate and screws; power
                                      instrumentation       saw; I.I.                                    pins; I.I.                   drill and saw; I.I.

                                    Unique                  Fracture or radiolucent table                ⇐                            ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics             ± Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                      ⇐                            ⇐

                                    Surgical time           1.5–2.5 h                                                                 2–4 h

                                    Closing                 Spica cast, frequently                       ± Spica cast                 Spica cast, occasionally
                                      considerations
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    EBL                     250–750 mL                                   ⇐                            500–1000 mL

                                    Postop care             PACU → room. Spica cast;                     ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            Nonweight bearing ~6 wk; no full
                                                              weight bearing, 3 mo.

                                    Mortality               Minimal                                      ⇐                            ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Persistent hip dysplasia: 5–20%              ⇐                            ⇐
                                                               (depending on etiology)
                                                            Excess blood loss from a perforating         ⇐                            ⇐
                                                               branch of the profunda femoris: < 1%
                                                            Infection: < 1%                              ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            Loss of fixation, instrument failure: < 1%   ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            Nonunion: < 1%                               ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            Persistent hip stiffness: < 1%               ⇐                            ⇐
                                                            Avascular necrosis: rare                     ⇐                            ⇐
                                    Pain score              6–8                                          6–8                          6–8

===== PAGE 1415 =====
Epiphysiodesis        1415

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                  2–21 yr
                    Male:Female                1:1

                     Incidence                 Depending on Dx

                     Etiology                  Coxa varum, coxa valgum due to muscle imbalance; hip dislocation; excessive medial femoral
                                               torsion (anteversion); osteochondrodystrophies (dwarfing syndromes); Perthes disease; SCFE

                    Associated                 Cerebral palsy; myelomeningocele, neuromyopathies; congenital hip dislocation; occasionally,
                      conditions               hypothyroidism as a cause of SCFE

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Koyonos L, Slenker N, Cohen S: Complications in brief: Osteotomy for lower extremity malalignment. Clin Orthop Relat Res
                        2012; 470:3630–6.
                     2. Raney EM, Grogan DP, Hurley ME, et al: The role of proximal femoral valgus osteotomy in Legg-Calve-Perthes disease.
                        Orthopedics 2002; 25(5):513–17.
                     3. Southwick WO: Osteotomy through the lesser trochanter for slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Bone Joint Surg 1967; 49(5):807–35.

                   Epiphysiodesis
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Epiphysiodesis is performed in skeletally imma-
                   ture adolescents to eliminate or retard growth of the longer
                   limb in cases of leg length discrepancy (anisomelia). The tim-
                   ing of the procedure is critical, based on the child’s bone age
                   and discrepancy, which are plotted on a graph or computer
                   program. The procedure is most commonly performed through
                   small incisions (1”) above the knee, centered on the growth
                   plate (physis) of the distal femur or proximal tibia. The original
                   Phemister technique (Fig. 12.7-13) is an approach in which a
                   ¾”–1¼” square or rectangular block of bone is removed using
                   a box chisel centered on the physis, visualized directly. The
                   bone block is rotated 90° or 180° and reinserted, causing a bony

                                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                   bridge across the physis. Blount subsequently used stout, rein-
                   forced staples to bracket the physis and “lock it.” This provides a
                   theoretical advantage of reversibility (i.e., if staples are removed,
                   growth may resume if the procedure was performed at too early
                   an age). More recently, a percutaneous technique of simply                    Figure 12.7-13. Phemister method of
                   drilling directly across the cartilaginous physeal growth plate,              epiphysiodesis (block of bone reversed,
                   causing a bony bridge, has been used. This is accomplished                    then reinserted to form osseous bar).
                   through small stab incisions, under fluoroscopic control.                     (Reproduced with permission from
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Limb-length discrepancies of 2–5
                                                                                                 Chapman MW: Chapman’s Orthopaedic
                   cm in adolescents (willing to accept a slight diminution in                   Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                   adult stature)                                                                Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                   Percutaneous                        Epiphyseal Stapling
                                              Open Epiphysiodesis                  Epiphysiodesis
                    Position                  Supine, with tourniquet              Supine                              Supine, with tourniquet

===== PAGE 1416 =====
1416   c h a p t e r 12.7      Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                  Percutaneous                        Epiphyseal Stapling
                                                               Open Epiphysiodesis                Epiphysiodesis

                                    Incision                   3–4 cm longitudinal incision,      1 cm, same area as open             4–5 cm, same area as open
                                                               medial and laterally centered      epiphysiodesis                      epiphysiodesis
                                                               incisions over distal femoral
                                                               and/or proximal tibial epiphysis

                                    Special                    Box chisel                         Drill point and sleeve              Heavy, reinforced staples
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                     Tourniquet used                    I.I. control mandatory; tourni-     ⇐
                                      considerations                                              quet (optional)

                                    Antibiotics                ± Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv            ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Surgical time              1h                                 ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Closing                    Cylinder cast or knee              ⇐                                   ⇐
                                      considerations           immobilizer

                                    EBL                        < 50 mL                            ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Postop care                PACU → room; crutches for          ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                               comfort

                                    Mortality                  Minimal                            ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Morbidity                  Under- or overcorrection with      ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                                 regard to length: 5–10%
                                                               Wound problems: < 5%               ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                               Asymmetric growth arrest →         ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                                 valgus or varus deformity:
                                                                 2–5%
                                                               Anterior or lateral compart-       –                                   –
                                                                 ment syndrome: 1 %
                                                               Fracture: 1 %                      –                                   –
                                                               Peroneal palsy: < 1 %              –                                   –
                                    Pain score                 3–5                                2–3                                 3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                  9–14 yr (adolescents, usually healthy with limb-length discrepancy 2–6 cm)
                                    Male:Female                1:1
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Incidence                  < 1/1000

                                    Etiology                   Idiopathic hemihypertrophy; neurologic (e.g., polio, hemiplegia); congenital deformities of the
                                                               lower extremities (e.g., congenitally short femur, fibular hemimelia); osteomyelitis; development
                                                               of tumorous conditions (e.g., enchondromatosis); traumatic growth plate injuries occurring near
                                                               puberty; epiphyseal problems related to hip (slipped epiphysis, sequelae of Perthes disease);
                                                               Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome

                                    Associated                 Other contractures in neurologic conditions (e.g., polio); neurofibromatosis, AV fistulae; Wilms’
                                      conditions               tumor (rare)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Blair VP III, Walker SJ, Sheridan JJ, et al: Epiphysiodesis: a problem of timing. J Pediatr Orthop 1982; 2(3):281–4.
                                     2. Bowen JR, Torres RR, Forlin E: Partial epiphysiodesis to address genu varum or genu valgum. J Pediatr Orthop 1992; 12(3):359–64.

===== PAGE 1417 =====
Sofield Procedure     1417

                     3. Kemnitz S, Moens P, Fabry G: Percutaneous epiphysiodesis for leg length discrepancy. J Pediatr Orthop 2003; 12(1):69–71.
                     4. Waseem M, Fischer J, Paton RW: Partial percutanous epiphysiodesis in patients with congenital abnormalities of the growth
                        plates. J Pediart Orthop B 2004; 13:39–42.

                   Sofield Procedure
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The Sofield procedure, or “fragmentation rodding,” is most commonly performed for deformity of
                   the long bone and to prevent recurrent fracture, usually a result of osteogenesis imperfecta. The procedure involves
                   exposure of at least one end and a varying amount of the bony shaft. If the deformity is severe, the entire shaft is
                   exposed via a longitudinal incision, usually laterally. The bone is divided (osteotomized) into the minimum number
                   of segments that will allow a straight intramedullary rod to traverse the segments (usually 2–4 osteotomies). The
                   construct is justly referred to as a “shish kebab.” It is needed less frequently in the upper extremities.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Because a growing bone will elongate beyond the end of a simple intramedullary
                   rod after 1–2 yr, the resulting unsupported portion of the bone will be liable to fracture or develop a new deformity. To
                   obviate this problem, Bailey and Dubow developed an elongating rod system, consisting of an outer tubular rod sleeve
                   (the female portion) and an inner obturator portion (male). Both ends of the telescoping rod are anchored in the ends of
                   the bones. The system elongates much like a car radio antenna and decreases the need for frequent revisions. The surgi-
                   cal technique is, however, identical to any fragmentation rodding, except that both ends of the bone must be exposed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Osteogenesis imperfecta; fibrous dysplasia (occasionally); rickets; congenital pseudarthro-
                   sis of the tibia

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                    Position                 Supine
                    Incision                 Lateral for femur; anterolateral for tibia

                     Special                 ± fluoroscopy (I.I.) table
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Tendency to hyperthermia; other bones may fracture in more severe cases, even as a result of a
                       considerations        BP cuff. If dentinogenesis imperfecta is present, extreme care should be taken during intubation
                                             to prevent tooth trauma. In these patients, neck motion is often limited.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv

                    Surgical time            1–1.5 h/tibia; 1.5–2.5 h/femur (often done sequentially on the same day)
                    Closing                  Double spica cast if femur is rodded.
                      considerations

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                    EBL                      Depending on patient age and size, as well as use of a tourniquet for the femur, 50–250 mL; for
                                             the tibia, 50–100 mL
                    Postop care              PACU → room; avoid trauma to teeth, mouth, or other bones in PACU.
                    Mortality                < 1% (usually related to severe restrictive lung disease, in the most severely involved cases)
                    Morbidity                Intraop hyperthermia: common
                                             Intraop fracture of other bones
                                             Late rod migration: common
                                             Late refracture: common
                                             Nonunion: rare
                                             Exuberant callus simulating osteosarcoma: rare
                                             Infection: < 1% of rodding
                                             Radial nerve palsy (in cases of humerus or radius rodding)
                    Pain score               2–3 (It is surprising how little discomfort these children have, especially the 2nd or 3rd time a
                                             bone is rodded.)

===== PAGE 1418 =====
1418   c h a p t e r 12.7      Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                  2–25 yr
                                    Male:Female                1:1

                                    Incidence                  1/20,000 (osteogenesis imperfecta); other etiologies much less common

                                    Etiology                   Congenital (hereditary deficit in collagen synthesis), most commonly as autosomal dominant or
                                                               spontaneous mutation: all cases

                                    Associated                 Dentinogenesis imperfecta; diminished vital capacity due to associated kyphoscoliosis ↓ hearing
                                      conditions               due to otosclerosis and impingement of the 8th cranial nerve; pelvic distortion causing chronic
                                                               constipation; basilar impression and other C-spine abnormalities causing brain stem compression
                                                               or even hydrocephalus (rare)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Gamble JG, Strudwick WJ, Rinsky LA, et al: Complications of intramedullary rods in osteogenesis imperfecta: Bailey-Dubow
                                        rods versus non-elongating rods. J Pediatr Orthop 1988; 8(6):645–9.
                                     2. Marafioti RL, Westin GW: Elongating intramedullary rods in the treatment of osteogenesis imperfecta. J Bone Joint Surg
                                        1977; 59(4):467–72.
                                     3. Rodriquez RP, Bailey RW: Internal fixation of the femur in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. Clin Orthop 1988; 159:126–33.
                                     4. Wilkinson JM, Scott BW, Clarke AM, et al: Surgical stabilization of the lower limb in osteogenesis imperfecta using the
                                        Sheffield Telescopic Intramedullary Rod System. J Bone Joint Surg 1998; 80(6):999–1004.

                                   Limb Lengthening
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Limb lengthening usually is performed in the lower extrem-
                                   ity for congenital or acquired leg-length discrepancies of at least 5 cm.
                                   Lesser discrepancies are dealt with by bone shortening or epiphysiodesis
                                   of the long side. The basic principles include (a) application of an adjust-
                                   able, external fixator; (b) “low-energy,” transverse bone cut (osteotomy
                                   without use of a power saw) through a small, longitudinal incision over
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   the involved bone; (c) preservation of the periosteal sleeve; (d) gradual
                                   lengthening, usually 1 mm/day in fractional adjustments; and (e) when
                                   the desired limb length is obtained, either use bone graft and plate acutely
                                   or leave until the bone gap fills in and stabilizes (average 38 d/cm gained).
                                   Limb lengthening dates back to the early 1900s, but it fell into disfavor
                                   because of the high rate of major complications. Wagner improved the
                                   technique by introducing a simplified, unilateral, large-pin fixator, but per-
                                   formed the osteotomy in the midshaft and began lengthening immediately
                                   (Fig. 12.7-14). This technique usually requires a bone graft and later plating
                                   as a second operation to obtain healing. DeBastiani uses a similar large-
                                   pin fixator (Orthofix) but performs the osteotomy more toward the end of                Figure       12.7-14.      Wagner
                                   the bone (metaphysis) and waits a week before beginning the lengthening.                apparatus for leg lengthening.
                                   Spontaneous healing is usual. Ilizarov introduced a more complex, but                   (Reproduced with permission
                                   more adaptable, small-pin transfixation system with a circular fixator. In
                                                                                                                           from Chapman MW, ed: Operative
                                   a similar fashion, the Ilizarov method stretches the healing callus (callota-
                                                                                                                           Orthopaedics, 2nd edition. JB
                                   sis). Typically, 4–10 cm/bone are gained with any of the above techniques.
                                                                                                                           Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1993.)

===== PAGE 1419 =====
Limb Lengthening      1419

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Congenital or acquired anisomelia (limb-length discrepancy) due to overgrowth or growth
                   retardation > 5 cm.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                          Wagner                            Orthofix                       Ilizarov
                    Position              Supine                            ⇐                              ⇐

                    Incision              Longitudinal midshaft             Longitudinal proximal shaft    ⇐
                                                                            (metaphyseal)

                    Special               I.I.; Wagner device               I.I.; Orthofix device; large   Ilizarov frame (“Erector set”);
                      instrumentation     (Fig. 12.7-14); large bone pins   bone pins                      multiple 1.5–1.8 mm small
                                                                                                           diameter wires

                    Unique                Acute lengthening may cause       –                              Frame should be prepped
                      considerations      ↑ BP.                                                            prior to surgery because of
                                                                                                           “fiddle factor.”

                    Antibiotics           Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv             ⇐                              ⇐

                    Surgical time         1–2 h                             ⇐                              2–4 h

                    EBL                   < 100 mL                          ⇐                              ⇐

                    Postop care           PACU → room; early initiation     ⇐                              ⇐
                                          of physical therapy and/or
                                          CPM machine

                    Mortality             Minimal                           ⇐                              ⇐

                    Morbidity             While the device remains in       ⇐                              ⇐
                                          place, at least one of the fol-
                                          lowing complications is usual;
                                          frequently, several occur be-
                                          fore healing is complete:
                                          • Joint stiffness or localized   ⇐                              ⇐
                                             pin infection: Very common
                                             (50% temporary)
                                          • Edema, swelling, pressure      ⇐                              ⇐
                                             sores: Common
                                          • Joint subluxation: Common      ⇐                              ⇐
                                          • Psychological decompensa-      ⇐                              ⇐
                                             tion due to pain: Common
                                          • Premature consolidation:       ⇐                              ⇐
                                             Common
                                          • Skin necrosis: Common          ⇐                              ⇐

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                          • Wound infection: Common        ⇐                              ⇐
                                          • Localized osteomyelitis:       ⇐                              ⇐
                                             Common
                                          • Axial deviation of the bone:   ⇐                              ⇐
                                             Common
                                          • Delayed union, nonunion,       ⇐                              ⇐
                                             late fracture: Common
                                          • Pin penetration of a vessel    ⇐                              ⇐
                                             or nerve: Rare
                                          • Compartment syndrome: Rare     ⇐                              ⇐
                                          • Sudeck’s atrophy: Rare          ⇐                              ⇐
                    Pain score            7–8                               7–8                            7–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range             10–30 yr
                    Male:Female           1:1

                    Incidence             Dependent on underlying Dx (common in polio)

===== PAGE 1420 =====
1420   c h a p t e r 12.7      Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                    Etiology                   Congenital deficiencies of the lower extremities (e.g., proximal focal femoral deficiency, congenitally
                                                               short femur, fibular hemimelia); osteomyelitis, traumatic growth plate injury, fracture; asymmetric
                                                               neurologic conditions (e.g., polio or cerebral palsy); congenital hemihypertrophy

                                    Associated                 Hip and knee contractures; in cases of polio, other deformities, and weaknesses; AVM; congeni-
                                      conditions               tal or developmental hip dislocation

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, p. 1426.
                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Aronson J: Limb-lengthening, skeletal reconstruction, and bone transport with the Ilizarov method. J Bone Joint Surg
                                        1997; 79(8):1243–58.
                                     2. Friend L, Widmann RF: Advances in management of limb length discrepancy and lower limb deformity. Curr Opin Pediatr
                                        2008; 20(1):46–51.
                                     3. Murray JH, Fitch RD: Distraction histogenesis: principles and indications. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 1996; 4(6):317–27.
                                     4. Noonan KJ, Leyes M, Forriol F, et al: Distraction osteogenesis of the lower extremity with use of monolateral external fixation.
                                        A study of two hundred and sixty-one femora and tibiae. J Bone Joint Surg 1998; 80(6):793–806.
                                     5. Sabharwal S, Rozbruch SR: What’s new in limb lengthening and deformity correction. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2011; 93:
                                        2323–32.

                                   Patellar Realignment
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Patellar realignment encompasses over 100 procedures designed to prevent lateral subluxation and
                                   dislocation of the patella. These disorders include a spectrum of malalignments of the patella, ranging from simple
                                   excess lateral tilt, recurrent partial subluxation, and recurrent episodic dislocation, to irreducible chronic dislocation.
                                   As such, the surgical procedures also encompass a spectrum of complexities, depending on the degree of instability.
                                   Nowadays, an arthroscopic inspection often is performed first. The basic principles of the repair include both proxi-
                                   mal and distal realignment. Proximal realignment includes (a) lateral release, which is the division of the contracted
                                   lateral patellar retinacular joint capsule and other tight lateral tissue—the first step in all surgical repair; (b) medial
                                   tightening, including reefing and/or advancement of the medial capsule and vastus medialis muscle insertion; and (c)
                                   distal realignment, consisting of redirection of the patellar tendon more medially (and sometimes more anteriorly).
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Arthroscopic or open lateral release is the simplest and first-step procedure.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   It may be sufficient when there is only subluxation and not true dislocation, and it has the advantage of being an outpa-
                                   tient procedure. For frank dislocation, an open “proximal realignment” also includes the medial tautening. If this is not
                                   sufficient to hold the patella centralized and if the patient has open epiphyses (< 16 yr), the lateral half of the patellar
                                   tendon may be released (distal realignment) and reattached medially (Roux-Goldthwait) or the patella may be held
                                   medially by tenodesing the semitendinosus tendon to it. In skeletally mature patients, the bony insertion of the patel-
                                   lar tendon is osteotomized and transferred medially (Trillat) or anteriomedially (Maquet). The Hauser procedure
                                   of distal and medial transfer of the tibial tubercle has had a very poor long-term outcome and is seldom performed.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Lateral patellar subluxation; recurrent dislocation; congenital or chronic lateral patellar
                                   dislocation

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                               Proximal Realignment               Trillat                             Maquet
                                    Position                   Supine, with tourniquet            ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Incision                   Anterior transverse or longi-      Anterior longitudinal               Transverse or oblique
                                                               tudinal or oblique, about the
                                                               knee, or arthroscopic

===== PAGE 1421 =====
Patellar Realignment      1421

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                              Proximal Realignment                Trillat                          Maquet

                    Special                   None                                Single bone screw                ⇐
                      instrumentation

                    Unique                    Tourniquet                          ⇐                                May use iliac or bank bone
                      considerations                                                                               graft.
                    Antibiotics               Optional, cefazolin 25 mg/          Usually, cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv   ⇐
                                              kg iv
                    Surgical time             1.5 h                               1–2 h                            ⇐
                    Closing                   Cylinder cast                       ⇐                                Skin closure may be difficult,
                      considerations                                                                               depending on elevation of
                                                                                                                   tibial tubercle.
                    Postop care               PACU → home, if arthroscopic        PACU → room                      ⇐
                    EBL                       < 100 mL                            ⇐                                ⇐
                    Mortality                 Minimal                             ⇐                                ⇐
                    Morbidity                 Recurrence: 5–10%                   ⇐                                ⇐
                                              Late stiffness or ↑ knee pain:      ⇐                                ⇐
                                                5%
                                              Superficial wound dehiscence        <5%                              ≤ 5%
                                                or infection: ≤ 5%
                                              Anterior compartment                ⇐                                ⇐
                                                syndrome of the leg
                                                (Hauser procedure): 1–5%
                                              Deep infection: 1–2%                ⇐                                ⇐
                                              Peroneal palsy: < 1%                ⇐                                ⇐
                    Pain score                4–6                                 4–6                              4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                 2–20 yr (most commonly, 13–20 yr)
                    Male:Female               1:3

                    Incidence                 Subluxation: very common
                                              Recurrent dislocation: rare
                                              Congenital dislocation: very rare

                    Etiology                  Generalized ligamentous laxity; familial tendency; congenital hypoplasia at a lateral femoral con-
                                              dyle; abnormal attachment or contracture of the IT band; medial femoral torsion or genu valgum;
                                              trauma

                                                                                                                                                             Pediatric Surgery
                    Associated                Diffuse hyperlaxity syndromes (Ehlers-Danlos, Marfan, etc.); nail patella syndrome (hypoplastic
                      conditions              nails and dislocated radial heads, as well as hypoplastic patellae)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Baker RH, Carroll N, Dewar FP, et al: The semitendinosus tenodesis for recurrent dislocation of the patella. J Bone Joint
                        Surg 1972; 54(l):103–9.
                     2. Hennrikus W, Pylawka T: Patellofemoral instability in skeletally immature athletes. Instr Course Lect 2012; 62:445–53.
                     3. Hughston J, Walsh WM: Proximal and distal reconstruction of the extensor mechanism for patellar subluxation. Clin Orthop
                        1979; 144:36–42.
                     4. Mulford JS, Wakeley CJ, Eldridge JD: Assessment and management of chronic patellofemoral instability. J Bone Joint Surg Br
                        2007; 89(6):709–16.

===== PAGE 1422 =====
1422   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                     5. Nelitz M, Dreyhaupt J, Reichel H, Woelfle J, Lippacher S: Anatomic reconstruction of the medial patellofemoral ligament in
                                        children and adolescents with open growth plates: surgical technique and clinical outcome. Am J Sports Med 2013; 41:58-63.
                                     6. Spindler KP: Reconstruction of the medial patellofemoral ligament was effective for traumatic patellar dislocation. J Bone
                                        Joint Surg Am 2012; 94:2093.
                                     7. Tachdjian MO: Pediatric Orthopaedics. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1990, 1551–95.
                                     8. Wall JJ: Compartment syndrome as a complication of the Hauser procedure. J Bone Joint Surg 1979; 61(2):185–91.

                                   Tendon Transfer, Lengthening (Posterior Tibial)
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Extremity tendons may be lengthened (for contracture) or transferred to change the muscle force vec-
                                   tor and compensate for paralysis or paresis of other muscle groups. Originally used for the treatment of poliomyelitis
                                   sequelae, these lengthenings and transfers are now used for a variety of deformities 2° more common neuromuscular
                                   disorders, such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophies, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, and traumatic nerve palsies.
                                   Basic principles are that the muscles to be transferred should be at least grade 4/5 strength and that the loss of nor-
                                   mal function should be well compensated. The posterior tibial muscle (PTM) is a representative example, but many
                                   extremity muscles have one or more described lengthenings or transfers. Such procedures frequently are combined
                                   with other transfers or fusions.
                                   For moderate spastic ankle varus, the simplest procedure, PTM lengthening, is accomplished by an intramuscular
                                   myotendinous “slide.” This refers to simply cutting the tendinous fibers well within the distal muscle belly and leaving
                                   a small gap in the tendon, while the surrounding muscle fibers remain intact. An alternative for spastic varus is the
                                   split posterior tibial transfer of the PTM. Four short, 2- to 3-cm incisions are used to expose and dissect half of
                                   the posterior tibia tendon at its insertion on the navicular. Then half of the tendon is passed proximally up its sheath
                                   to a second incision just posterior to the distal tibial shaft medially. The freed half tendon is passed laterally to the
                                   peroneal tendon sheath just distal to the lateral malleolus, where, through a final incision, the tendon is anastomosed
                                   to the peroneus brevis.
                                   For complete flaccid foot drop (e.g., peroneal nerve palsy), the entire posterior tibial tendon is transferred. First, it
                                   is detached at its medial insertion, delivered proximally at the distal tibia posteriorly, passed anteriorly through a
                                   window in the interosseous membrane, and then subcutaneously passed to the mid-dorsal surface of the foot, where
                                   it is fixed into the middle cuneiform by a pull-out stitch.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Flaccid or spastic developmental deformity, such as varus or valgus foot neuromuscular
                                   disease

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                              Lengthening                      Split Transfer                      Anterior Transfer
                                    Position                  Supine                           ⇐                                   ⇐

                                    Incision                  Longitudinal posteromedial       Medial foot; posteromedial          Medial foot; posteromedial
                                                              calf                             calf; lateral ankle; lateral foot   calf; anterior ankle; dorsal
                                                                                                                                   foot

                                    Special                   None                             Tendon passer                       Pull-out suture; buttons
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                    Underlying neurologic disease.   ⇐                                   ⇐
                                      considerations          Usually added to other proce-
                                                              dures (e.g., Achilles tendon
                                                              lengthenings).
                                    Antibiotics               Usually none                     ⇐                                   ⇐
                                    Surgical time             30 min                           1h                                  ⇐

===== PAGE 1423 =====
Triple Arthrodesis and Grice Procedure (Extra-Articular Subtalar Arthrodesis)                           1423

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                Lengthening                           Split Transfer                        Anterior Transfer
                    Closing                     Below-knee cast                       ⇐                                     ⇐
                      considerations
                    EBL                         < 20 mL                               < 50 mL                               ⇐
                    Postop care                 PACU or room                          ⇐                                     ⇐
                    Mortality                   Rare                                  ⇐                                     ⇐
                    Morbidity                   Over- or undercorrection              ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                Hematoma                              ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                Drainage: < 1%                        ⇐                                     ⇐
                    Pain score                  1–3                                   3–4                                   3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                   3–30 yr
                    Male:Female                 1:1

                    Incidence                   Dependent on Dx

                    Etiology                    Poliomyelitis; cerebral palsy, spina bifida; traumatic peroneal nerve injury; neuropathies, myopa-
                                                thies (e.g., Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease)

                    Associated                  Multiple other contractures
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Barnes MJ, Herring JA: Combined split anterior tibial-tendon transfer and intramuscular lengthening of the posterior tibial
                        tendon. Results in patients who have a varus deformity of the foot due to spastic cerebral palsy. J Bone Joint Surg 1991; 73(5):
                        734–8.
                     2. Green NE, Griffin PP, Shiavi R: Split posterior tibial-tendon transfers in spastic cerebral palsy. J Bone Joint Surg 1983; 65(6):748–54.
                     3. Hoffer MD, Barakat G, Koffman M: 10-year follow-up of split anterior tibial tendon transfer in cerebral palsied patients with
                        spastic equinovarus deformity. J Pediatr Orthop 1985; 5(4):432–4.
                     4. Miller G, Hsu JD, Hoffer MM, et al: Posterior tibial tendon transfer: a review of the literature and analysis of 74 procedures.
                        J Pediatr Orthop 1982; 2(4):363–70.

                                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery
                     5. Richards BM: Interosseous transfer of tibialis posterior for common peroneal nerve palsy. J Bone Joint Surg 1989; 71(5):834–7.
                     6. Rinsky LA: Surgery for cerebral palsy. In: Chapman MW, ed. Chapman’s Orthopaedic Surgery, 3rd edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 4485–504.

                   Triple Arthrodesis and Grice Procedure
                   (Extra-Articular Subtalar Arthrodesis)
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Triple arthrodesis is used to realign the hind foot of skeletally mature patients with significant fixed
                   or flexible deformities of multiple etiologies. The technique involves denuding the cartilaginous surfaces of the
                   talonavicular, talocalcaneal (subtalar), and calcaneocuboid joints and fusing them. The approach is always through

===== PAGE 1424 =====
1424   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   an oblique lateral sinus tarsi incision and often an additional short medial incision over the talonavicular joint. For
                                   supple (passively correctable) deformities, the fusion is performed easily in situ. Fixed deformities are more difficult,
                                   but basically, any deformity (valgus, varus, planus, cavus, etc.) can be corrected by resecting appropriate wedges of
                                   bone. Fixation is usually internal with pins, screws, or staples, in addition to an external cast.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Because the triple arthrodesis removes growth cartilage, it is unsuitable in
                                   growing children (< 12–14 yr). Grice developed an extra-articular subtalar fusion that can be performed as early as
                                   age 3. It is basically a block of autologous bone graft placed between the talus and the calcaneus to stabilize a valgus
                                   heel. Tibial, fibular, or, preferably, iliac autologous graft is used through the same lateral sinus tarsi incision as for a
                                   triple arthrodesis.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Varus or cavovarus foot deformities; severe valgus or equinovalgus

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             Triple Arthrodesis                                       Grice Procedure
                                    Position                 Supine, slightly tilted up on the operative side         ⇐

                                    Incision                 2" oblique over the sinus tarsi; optional medial         ⇐
                                                             incision

                                    Special                  Pins, screws, or rods                                    Pin or screw
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Intraop x-ray to confirm pin position                    Iliac or tibial autologous graft
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              Usually, cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv up to 1 g                 Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv up to 1 g

                                    Surgical time            1–2 h                                                    1.5 h

                                    Closing                  Above-the-knee cast                                      ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                      < 100 mL                                                 < 50 mL

                                    Postop care              PACU → room                                              ⇐

                                    Mortality                Rare                                                     ⇐

                                    Morbidity                Superficial skin slough                                  ⇐
                                                             Superficial infection                                    ⇐
                                                             Nonunion of at least one arthrodesis site (usually       ⇐
                                                               talonavicular)
                                                             Aseptic necrosis of the talus: rare                      ⇐
                                    Pain score               6–8                                                      4–5
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                > 12 yr (triple arthrodesis); 3–10 yr (Grice)
                                    Male:Female              1:1
                                    Incidence                < 1% (depends on diagnosis and severity of deformity)

                                    Etiology                 Neuromuscular imbalance (most cases); congenital malformations (e.g., coalitions, severe pes
                                                             planus); incompletely treated or overcorrected clubfoot; postfracture of calcaneus or talus

                                    Associated               Poliomyelitis; cerebral palsy (↑ GERD, ↓ airway protective reflexes, ↑ postop pulmonary com-
                                      conditions             plications); myelomeningocele; Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (↑ sensitivity to muscle relaxants);
                                                             congenital tarsal coalition

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

===== PAGE 1425 =====
Surgical Correction of Clubfoot        1425

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Front NL, Grassbaugh JA, Baird G, Caskey P: Triple arthrodesis with lateral column lengthening for the treatment of
                        planovalgus deformity. J Pediatr Orthop 2011; 31:773–82.
                     2. Masrouha KZ, Morcuende JA: Relapse after tigialis anterior tendon transfer in idiopathic clubfoot treated by the Ponseti
                        method. J Pediatrb Orthop 2012; 32:81–4.

                   Surgical Correction of Clubfoot
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Turco popularized the one-stage surgical correction of resistant (uncorrected by casting) clubfoot
                   (talipes equinovarus) in 1971. The orthopedic literature, however, is replete with reports of varying techniques for
                   surgical correction of clubfoot. The three components of the deformity are (a) hindfoot equinus (back of the heel
                   is up); (b) varus (rolled inwardly); and (c) forefoot adductus (medial deviation). Beyond this, however, there exists
                   considerable disagreement as to the pathologic anatomy, ideal skin incision, position, and which structures to release.
                   Most surgeons vary the degree of release in proportion to the degree of deformity, often performing release of the
                   same deep structures through totally different skin incisions. The most important structures released include the en-
                   tire posterior capsule of the ankle and subtalar joint; capsule of the subtalar, talonavicular, and calcaneocuboid joints;
                   tendo Achilles, posterior tibial tendon, and usually the toe flexors; and origin of the abductor, halluces, and plantar
                   fascia. The navicular is repositioned on the talus and usually held with a small pin.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Turco’s procedure is essentially a posteromedial procedure only and is
                   performed through one incision on the medial aspect of the foot. Crawford described a much more extensile
                   approach through an incision (Cincinnati) that runs from anteromedial, around the back of the tendo Achilles, and
                   then anterolateral to the calcaneocuboid joint. This approach is also used by McKay, Simons, and others for a more
                   complete release. If there is severe equinus deformity, however, the incision is difficult to close posteriorly when
                   the foot is brought up. Carroll accomplishes much the same correction using a separate medial and posterolateral
                   incision.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Resistant idiopathic clubfoot; secondary clubfoot due to paralysis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Turco                                 Cincinnati/McKay/Simons            Carroll
                    Position                Supine                                Prone or supine                    Supine
                    Incision                Straight medial foot                  Transverse from the navicular      Medial zigzag and pos-
                                                                                  bone medially posteriorly          terolateral longitudinal

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                  across the heel cord, then
                                                                                  laterally to the cuboid
                    Special                 Usually loupe magnification;          ⇐                                  ⇐
                      instrumentation       small K wires to hold reduction
                    Unique                  Tourniquet mandatory and often        ⇐                                  ⇐
                      considerations        bilateral
                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv                 ⇐                                  ⇐
                    Surgical time           1–2 h/foot                            ⇐                                  ⇐
                    Closing                 Well padded, loose-fitting,           ⇐                                  ⇐
                      considerations        above-the-knee cast × 10–14 d
                    EBL                     < 30 mL                               ⇐                                  ⇐
                    Postop care             PACU → room                           ⇐                                  ⇐
                    Mortality               Rare                                  ⇐                                  ⇐

===== PAGE 1426 =====
1426   c h a p t e r 12.7     Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                            Turco                                  Cincinnati/McKay/Simons             Carroll
                                    Morbidity               Mild, persistent deformity:            ⇐                                   ⇐
                                                              very common
                                                            Hematoma: 2%
                                                            Superficial infection: 1–2%
                                                            Avascular necrosis
                                                            Overcorrection valgus, planus
                                                            Pressure changes of the
                                                              navicula
                                                            Wound dehiscence or necrosis
                                                            Transection of posterior tibial
                                                              nerve or artery branch:
                                                              Rare (except in patients who
                                                              have had multiple operations)
                                    Pain score              2–5                                    2–5                                 2–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                3 mo–6 yr
                                    Male:Female              2:1 (idiopathic type)

                                    Incidence                1.2/10,000 live births (idiopathic type)

                                    Etiology                 Genetic or hereditary effects; neuromuscular defects of the calf muscles; primary defect of
                                                             formation of the talus and/or other tarsal bones; shortened ligaments and muscles

                                    Associated               Arthrogryposis (difficult intubation; ±VSD, other CHD); Larsen’s syndrome (difficult intubation,
                                      conditions             ± ↑ ICP); Freeman-Sheldon syndrome (difficult intubation); osteochondral dystrophies (e.g.,
                                                             diastrophic dwarfism); spinal dysraphism; tethered spinal cord; congenital constricting bands;
                                                             poliomyelitis

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery of the Pelvis and Lower Extremities, see p. 1426.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Cummings RJ, Davidson RS, Armstrong PF, et al: Congenital clubfoot. J Bone Joint Surg 2002; 84A(2):290–308.
                                     2. Duffy CM, Salazar JJ, Humphreys L, McDowell BC: Surgical versus Ponseti approach for the management of CTEV: a
                                        comparative study. J Pediatr Orthop 2013; 33:326–32.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                     3. Turco VJ: Resistant congenital club foot-one-stage posteromedial release with internal fixation. A follow-up report of a
                                        fifteen-year experience. J Bone Joint Surg 1979; 61(6A):805–14.
                                     4. Verma A, Mehtani A, Sural S, et al: Management of idiopathic clubfoot in toddlers by Ponseti’s method. J Pediatr Orthop B
                                        2012; 21:79–84.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR PEDIATRIC ORTHOPEDIC
                                       SURGERY OF THE PELVIS AND LOWER EXTREMITIES
                                   (Procedures covered: pelvic osteotomy; acetabular augmentation & Chiari osteotomy; Ober fasciotomy; Yount
                                   Ober release; hip, open reduction; adductor release and/or transfer; psoas release; pinning of SCFE; femoral
                                   osteotomy; epiphysiodesis; Sofield procedure; limb lengthening; tendon transfer or lengthening; triple ar-
                                   throdesis, Grice procedure; correction of clubfoot)

===== PAGE 1427 =====
Surgical Correction of Clubfoot        1427

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Children undergoing orthopedic procedures of the lower extremities typically fall into two groups: (a) posttrauma
                   but otherwise healthy and (b) those with a variety of chronic medical problems, including cerebral palsy, congenital
                   hip dislocation, limb deformities, osteogenesis imperfecta, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, epidermolysis bullosa,
                   and various myopathies and muscular dystrophies. The anesthesiologist should review the anesthetic implications
                   of these various syndromes or diseases (see Table 12.7-2). Many of these patients will have cardiac, respiratory,
                   endocrine, and metabolic derangements, as well as airway abnormalities that may affect anesthetic management.
                   In addition, the surgical procedures may run the gamut from a simple syndactyly repair of the toes with little blood
                   loss to pelvic osteotomies (in small children) with blood loss approaching the patients’ blood volume. Many patients
                   with slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) are obese and require anesthetic techniques that minimize the risk
                   of aspiration.

                    Respiratory             Patient’s preop activity level is a good indication for baseline respiratory function. Careful
                                            assessment is necessary as associated anomalies may affect airway or lungs. Chronic otitis
                                            2° eustachian tube dysfunction is common. Postpone surgery (~2–3 wk) if Sx of acute URI
                                            (e.g., runny nose, fever, sore throat, cough) are present.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P; CXR

                    Cardiovascular          Some pediatric patients with congenital musculoskeletal anomalies presenting for ortho-
                                            pedic procedures have coexisting cardiovascular anomalies. Preop review of patient’s H&P
                                            is essential. Patients should not be accepted for orthopedic surgery and anesthesia until
                                            they are in the best possible physical and emotional condition. For children with CHD
                                            or who require cardiac medication, it is advisable to consult with a pediatric cardiologist
                                            before surgery. If taking ACE inhibitors, hold am of surgery, as may lead to intractable
                                            intraop hypotension.
                                            *NB: The consequences of VAE may be disastrous (e.g., cerebral or myocardial emboliza-
                                            tion) in patients with R→ L shunt lesions. All iv lines, injection ports, and syringes should
                                            be air free.
                                            Tests: EKG; Hct; baseline SaO2 ; CXR, as necessary; Echo

                    Neurological            For patients with cerebral palsy presenting for orthopedic surgery, preop understanding
                                            of their intellectual functional capacity is necessary. Information about patient’s behav-
                                            ioral or intellectual abilities is usually best obtained from parents or guardian. If patient is
                                            on seizure-control medication, it is recommended that the medication be continued until
                                            surgery. All patients who require Ober fasciotomy or Yount release will have profound
                                            weakness of lower extremities, if not of the entire body. Must be careful in choice of muscle
                                            relaxant (generally avoid depolarizing agents). Many patients with muscular dystrophy
                                            present for repeated orthopedic procedures. Patients with congenital muscular dystrophy
                                            (especially Duchenne’s or Becker’s) can have significant associated cardiac dysfunction. A
                                            pediatric cardiologist should be involved in the preanesthetic evaluation of their LV func-

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                                            tion, size, LV ejection fraction, shortening fraction, and ECHO exam. It is important to
                                            note that asymptomatic carriers of these X-linked muscular dystrophies can have associ-
                                            ated ECHO and EKG abnormalities.

                    Hematologic             Complications of blood loss remain a major anesthetic consideration in pelvic osteotomies,
                                            especially in small children or those who have ↑ bleeding 2° osteogenic bone or bleeding
                                            disorders. There is no hard-and-fast rule for an acceptable amount of blood loss before
                                            transfusion therapy begins; each case must be individualized. Patients who need ↑ O2-
                                            carrying capacity (e.g., congenital heart disease, sickle cell anemia (SSA), evidence of V/Q
                                            mismatch from preexisting pulmonary disease) will require transfusion at lower levels of
                                            blood loss than otherwise healthy children. Blood transfusion therapy must be considered
                                            after the loss of 15–20% of the patient’s total blood volume. Predonation is limited by age,
                                            size, and level of cooperation with blood-collecting techniques. Hemodilution is not used
                                            frequently in pediatrics. Cell salvaging can introduce both intracellular and surgical debris
                                            back into circulation but may avoid heterologous transfusion.

===== PAGE 1428 =====
1428   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Table 12.7-2. Preop Anesthesia Considerations for Pediatric Orthopedic Diseases
                                   General Considerations       Pediatric orthopedic patients may present with a spectrum of congenital and acquired prob-
                                                                lems. Congenital malformations and deformations include clubfoot, developmental disloca-
                                                                tion of hip, and congenital limb deficiencies. Acquired conditions include trauma, infections,
                                                                and growth disturbance.
                                                                A variety of patients with neuromuscular disorders present for orthopedic procedures
                                                                and present special challenges to the anesthesiologist (e.g., cerebral palsy, spina bifida,
                                                                muscular dystrophy). Other syndromes and chronic conditions with orthopedic manifesta-
                                                                tions include osteogenesis imperfecta, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and epidermolysis
                                                                bullosa. The anesthesiologist should review and understand the anesthetic implications of
                                                                these various syndromes.
                                   Anesthetic Considerations
                                   Specific Disease
                                   Achondroplasia               ± Unstable spine: preop neuro and ortho exams are critical. Careful positioning necessary;
                                                                prevent compression of cervicomedullary junction by placing a bolster under shoulders.
                                                                Difficult iv access. ± GERD 2° obesity. Anticipate difficult mask fit and intubation. Possible
                                                                choanal stenosis/narrow nasopharynx; may preclude nasal airway/nasal intubation and
                                                                placement of NG tube. Smaller ETTs are needed. ± Restrictive lung disease and chronic
                                                                respiratory infections common.
                                   Apert syndrome               C-spine fusion and small nasopharynx. Hypoplastic maxilla, prominent mandible/cleft palate.
                                                                Difficult laryngoscopy and ET intubation. ± Tracheal stenosis/abnormal tracheal cartilage.
                                                                Possible choanal stenosis/atresia; may preclude nasal airway, nasal ETT, and NG tube
                                                                placement. Difficult vascular access. ±Craniosynostosis → ↑ ICP. ± CHD.
                                   Arthrogryposis               Poor cervical mobility; TMJ ankylosis; possibility of difficult intubation. IV access and posi-
                                                                tioning difficult 2° flexion or contracture deformity. 10% incidence of CHD.
                                   Cerebral palsy               Communication difficulties. Scoliosis → restrictive lung disease. ± GERD. ↑ sensitivity to
                                                                succinylcholine. ↑ resistance to NMRs. MAC decreased. Contractures → restricted access
                                                                for examination and positioning. ± Latex allergy. Difficult iv access.
                                   Juvenile rheumatoid          Poor cervical mobility; TMJ ankylosis; possibility of difficult intubation. ± Restrictive pulmo-
                                     arthritis                  nary disease. ± Restrictive pericarditis and tamponade.
                                   Klippel-Feil syndrome        Limited C-spine mobility → difficult intubation. Impaired renal drug excretion.
                                   Marfan syndrome              Atlantoaxial instability: evaluate C-spine before laryngoscopy. Care in positioning needed.
                                                                May require larger than normal doses of spinal epidural anesthesia 2° height. Aortic dilata-
                                                                tion → aortic insufficiency ± aortic dissection/aneurysm. Avoid ↑ BP. Anticipate difficult
                                                                intubation 2° narrow palate. Lung cysts → pneumothorax.
                                   Muscular dystrophy           Possible cardiomyopathy: Avoid cardiac depressant drugs. ↑ sensitivity to muscle relaxants.
                                                                MH susceptibility. ↓ gastric emptying and weak laryngeal reflexes. Avoid succinylcholine.
                                                                May have MVR and cardiac conduction abnormalities. May require postop ventilation.
                                   Myopathies                   Avoid all muscle relaxants and respiratory depressants. Postop ventilation may be necessary.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Osteogenesis imperfecta      Bones fracture easily (e.g., with BP cuff): Use extreme care in positioning and intubation.
                                                                Hypermetabolic fever may occur during anesthesia. Plt dysfunction: Difficult airway. Use
                                                                atropine with caution as it may exacerbate pyrexia. CHD may require antibiotic prophylaxis.
                                                                ± Difficult airway. ± Restrictive lung disease. Deafness may make communication difficult.
                                   Septic arthritis             Infection/systemic toxicity slows gastric emptying; requires rapid sequence intubation
                                                                (Appendix B-4). Dehydration 2° ↑ T and ↓ fluid intake → hypovolemia/hemodynamic instabil-
                                                                 ity. Rx: adequate fluid resuscitation with balanced salt solution.

                                   Laboratory               Tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication            Premedication for separation anxiety (e.g., midazolam) and facilitating induction. Care
                                                            must be taken if premedication is used in patients with respiratory or cardiac dysfunc-
                                                            tion. Dosage must be individualized (see p. E-4). Children with valvular disease, prosthetic
                                                            valves, and/or most forms of CHD, as well as postcardiac-correction patients, should
                                                            receive antibiotics for bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis preop.

===== PAGE 1429 =====
Surgical Correction of Clubfoot       1429

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: As indicated in the preop considerations, these patient populations cover a vast spectrum,
                   from fit and healthy children to those suffering from a variety of clinical syndromes with airway and cardiorespira-
                   tory problems. Thus, anesthesia needs to be tailored to the individual patient. Some older children may benefit from
                   regional anesthesia with sedation. Some may do well with a combined regional/GA technique, whereas still others
                   with difficult airways may require awake FOB (see p. B-5). The following sections address some of these concerns.

                    Induction               Otherwise healthy: Standard pediatric (< 12 yr) (see p. D-1) or adult induction (see
                                            p. B-2). Difficult airway: A mask induction and FOL during spontaneous respiration
                                            should be considered. Alternatives include use of LMA/intubating LMA, Video laryngo-
                                            scope, FOL or light wand stylet, retrograde wire intubation, and tracheostomy.
                                            Muscle abnormalities: These patients may be very sensitive to muscle relaxants, have
                                            gastric hypomotility, and be predisposed to MH. Induction should be accomplished by
                                            nontriggering agents (e.g., propofol 1–2 mg/kg and rocuronium 0.5–1 mg/kg) if necessary
                                            for intubation. Succinylcholine usually is contraindicated in these patients. Dantrolene
                                            must be available, but it need not be administered prophylactically. A study of MH patients
                                            showed that 32 out of 89 had preexisting musculoskeletal abnormalities.
                                            Cardiorespiratory compromise: Inhalational induction, when administered cautiously,
                                            may be used safely in this group of patients. Intramuscular (e.g., ketamine 4–8 mg/kg im)
                                            inductions are usually safe and effective in neonates and infants with severe cardiac disease.

                    Maintenance             Otherwise healthy: Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3).
                                            Muscle abnormalities: Maintenance of anesthesia with a nontriggering agent (e.g., N2O,
                                            opiates) and short-acting NMRs is prudent. A peripheral nerve stimulator should be used
                                            to monitor muscle relaxation, as the effects of muscle relaxants may be unexpectedly
                                            prolonged.
                                            Cardiorespiratory compromise: The maintenance of anesthesia in this group most com-
                                            monly is accomplished by use of inhalational agents, additional narcotics, or other iv
                                            agents, depending on patient tolerance and postop plans for ventilatory management.

                    Emergence               Otherwise healthy: If a muscle relaxant is used, reverse with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg)
                                            and glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg iv) or edrophonium (0.5 mg/kg) and atropine (0.015 mg/kg
                                            iv). Make sure patient is awake and able to protect airway. A vital capacity of >15 mL/kg is
                                            considered an adequate sign of recovery of respiratory reserve.
                                            Muscle abnormalities: Anticipate postop respiratory impairment. Suction airway care-
                                            fully. The response to neostigmine is unpredictable and may precipitate myotonia. Contin-
                                            ued postop mechanical ventilation may be required.
                                            Cardiorespiratory compromise: Tourniquet release may cause significant. ↓ CO and ↓ BP,
                                            requiring temporary inotropic support. Otherwise, emergence as in normal patients.

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                   Regional anesthesia: Used in patients undergoing lower-extremity surgery

                    Caudal epidural         In young children, the epidural space can be reached easily by the caudal epidural approach,
                                            with less risk of dural puncture than with thoracic or lumbar epidural approaches. There is
                                            minimal risk of cord injury at the level of the sacrococcygeal ligament. The dural sac, how-
                                            ever, can extend to the level of the third or fourth sacral vertebra in the newborn; there-
                                            fore, care must be taken to avoid an inadvertent intrathecal injection. Bupivacaine provide
                                            reliable, long-lasting anesthesia and postop analgesia when given via the caudal epidural
                                            route. Bupivacaine 0.25% (or ropivacaine 0.2%) with epinephrine 1:200,000 (1 mL/kg)
                                            provides 3–6 h of analgesia for all procedures below the umbilicus. In infants (< 2.5 kg), a
                                            more dilute solution is used (0.125% or 0.175%), and the volume can be increased to remain
                                            below the toxic dose range (2.5 mg/kg). Intraop anesthesia with bupivacaine 0.25% with epi-
                                            nephrine 1:200,000 is given as a bolus with volumes determined by level desired (0.05 mL/
                                            kg/segment, not to exceed l mL/kg). Preservative-free clonidine (1–2 mcg/kg) as an additive
                                            to bupivacaine caudal anesthesia has been shown to increase the efficacy and duration of the
                                            analgesia.

===== PAGE 1430 =====
1430   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                   Continuous               Use bupivacaine 0.1–0.125% at rate of 0.1 mL/kg/h in patients < 5 yr; thereafter, patients
                                     epidural infusion      may require 0.05–0.15 mL/kg/h. Maximum hourly dose not to exceed 0.5 mg/kg/h of bupi-
                                                            vacaine. Usually requires postop Foley catheter.

                                   Peripheral nerve         Use of ultrasonography helps to improve the efficacy and safety of these blocks. Femoral,
                                     blocks                 obturator, and lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh can be blocked by doing a lumbar plexus
                                                            block at the level of the L4 vertebra or by doing a 3-in-1 block at the groin. Sciatic nerve
                                                            can be blocked in the posterior thigh at the apex of the popliteal fossa. Saphenous/sciatic
                                                            or femoral/sciatic combinations can provide excellent analgesia for distal extremity sur-
                                                            geries. If used in combination, these blocks can provide excellent postoperative analgesia
                                                            for most of the lower limb procedures with minimal side effects. Catheters can be left in
                                                            place for providing continuous postoperative analgesia. With the availability of safer and
                                                            less-expensive programmable pumps, most of the blocks can be done even for outpatient
                                                            procedures, and the children can be sent home with On-Q® pump infusions.

                                   Blood and fluid          IV: 22 ga or greater × 1–2                   There may be rapid fluid shifts in pediatric
                                      requirements                                                       patients undergoing orthopedic procedures.
                                                                                                         Close monitoring and adequate fluid replace-
                                                                                                         ment will ensure hemodynamic stability. In
                                                                                                         hip or pelvis surgery, blood loss may be sub-
                                                                                                         stantial, and adequate iv access is important
                                                                                                         as blood transfusion may be required.
                                                            NS/LR (at maintenance)
                                                             4 mL/kg/h: 0–10 kg
                                                             + 2 mL/kg/h: 11–20 kg
                                                             + 1 mL/kg/h: >20 kg (e.g., 25 kg
                                                             = 65 mL/h)
                                                            Warm fluids for long cases.

                                   Control of blood         Tourniquet: 120-min limit                    Use of pneumatic tourniquets has become
                                     loss                                                                common practice in peripheral orthopedic
                                                                                                         procedures. They reduce intraop blood loss;
                                                                                                         however, they cause pain and, upon removal,
                                                                                                         release products of anaerobic metabolism.

                                   Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. D-1).              Most pediatric patients presenting for extrem-
                                                            ± Arterial line                              ity surgery do not require invasive monitor-
                                                            ± CVP line                                   ing. An arterial or CVP line may be helpful,
                                                            Temperature                                  depending on patient’s medical condition,
                                                                                                         length of surgery, and anticipated blood loss.

                                   Positioning              3 and pad pressure points                    Patients with osteogenesis imperfecta or osteo-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                            3 eyes                                       porosis are at risk for fractures and joint dislo-
                                                                                                         cations and require special care in positioning.

                                   Complications            MH                                           Early Sx of MH include: Hypercapnea, tachy-
                                                                                                         cardia, tachypnea, unstable BP, dysrhyth-
                                                                                                         mias, cyanotic mottling of skin, rapid rise in
                                                                                                         T (1°/15 min), discolored urine, metabolic
                                                                                                         acidosis, respiratory acidosis, hyperkalemia,
                                                                                                         myoglobinuria. Rx: stop surgery and anes-
                                                                                                         thesia immediately; hyperventilate with 100%
                                                                                                         O2; administer dantrolene sodium iv (start-
                                                                                                         ing dose = 1–2 mg/kg q 5–10 min; maximum
                                                                                                         cumulative dose = 10 mg/kg) by rapid infu-
                                                                                                         sion. Procainamide (15 mg/kg) over 15 min
                                                                                                         may be required for dysrhythmias. Initiate
                                                                                                         cooling, correct acidosis and hyperkalemia.
                                                                                                         Maintain UO of at least 2 mL/kg/h. Moni-
                                                                                                         tor patient in ICU until danger of subsequent
                                                                                                         episodes is over (24 h).

===== PAGE 1431 =====
Surgery for Epidermolysis Bullosa           1431

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              MH                                          For MH considerations, see above.
                                               Respiratory insufficiency

                    Pain                       PCA                                         (see p. E-4).
                      management               Parenteral opiates
                                               Spinal/epidural opiates

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Aydogan MS, Korkmaz MF, Ozgul U, et al: Pain, fentanyl consumption, and delirium in adolescents after scoliosis surgery:
                        dexmedetomidine vs midazolam. Pediatr Anesth 2013; 23:446–52.
                     2. Ceviz N, Alehan F, Alehan D, et al: Assessment of left ventricular systolic and diastolic functions in children with merosin-
                        positive congenital muscular dystrophy. Int J Cardiol 2003; 87(2–3):129–33.
                     3. Ecoffey C: Pediatric regional anesthesia—upper extremity blocks. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatric Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 419–43.
                     4. Grain L, Cortina-Borja M, Forfar C, et al: Cardiac abnormalities and skeletal muscle weakness in carriers of Duchenne and
                        Becker muscular dystrophies and controls. Neuromuscul Disord 2001; 11(2):186–91.
                     5. Howell TK, Patel D: Plasma paracetamol concentrations after different doses of rectal paracetamol in older children. A
                        comparison of 1 g vs. 40 mg × kg(-1). Anaesthesia 2003; 58(1):69–73.
                     6. Lammers C, Wyckaert C: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB eds. Pediatr Anesth,
                        5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 757–77.
                     7. Marhover P, Ivani G, Suresh S, et al: Everyday regional anesthesia in children. Peadiatr Anaesth 2012; 22(10):995–1001.
                     8. Nowicki PD, Vanderhave KL, Gibbons K, et al: Perioperative pain control in pediatric patients undergoing orthopedic surgery.
                        J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2012; 20(12):755–65.
                     9. Piraccini E, Albarello R, Biagini C, et al: Spinal anesthesia plus ketamine-medazolam sedation for pediatric orthopedic
                        surgery in a developing country. HSR Proc Inten Care Cardiovasc Anesth 2012; 4(3):176–8.
                    10. Polaner DM, Taenzer AH, Walker BJ, et al: Pediatric Regional Anesthesia Network (PRAN): a multi-institutional study of the
                        use and incidence of complications of pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(6):1353–64.
                    11. Racca F, Mongini T, Wolfler A et al: Recommendations for anesthesia and perioperative management of patients with
                        neuromuscular disorders. Minerve Anesthesiol 2013; 79(4):419–33.
                    12. Stein BE, Srikumanran U, Tan WE, et al: Lower-extremity peripheral nerve blocks in the perioperative pain management of
                        orthopedic patients: AAOS exhibit selection. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2012; 94(22):e167.
                    13. Wongprasartsuk P, Stevens J: Cerebral palsy and anesthesia. Ped Anesth 2002; 12:296–303.
                    14. Zuckerberg AL, Yaster M: Anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 842–69.

                   Surgery for Epidermolysis Bullosa
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery

                   Description: Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a disabling inherited condition affecting the skin and submucosa. Re-
                   cessive dystrophic EB is the most common type requiring surgical treatment. Children develop lesions associated
                   with minimal trauma, which most commonly result in contractures of the hands and feet, mouth, and esophagus.
                   Special care is required in handling patients with EB because minor trauma from iv or EKG lead placement can
                   cause severe blistering. Hand surgery typically involves opening up the contracted fingers by removing the cocoon
                   of epidermis. The defects are grafted with full-thickness skin grafts, typically taken from the abdomen. Following
                   sedation or anesthesia, the affected extremity is gently sponged with dilute chlorhexidine solution. A tourniquet
                   is not applied because it is typically not required. A wrist block is administered by the surgeon. The cocoon of scar
                   tissue is removed, the fingers manipulated to expose the defects, and a full-thickness skin graft harvested. Generous
                   Bactroban ointment and nonadhesive dressings are placed on the hand, and a well-padded cast is applied at the end
                   of the procedure. Adhesive tape is avoided throughout the procedure.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: EB

===== PAGE 1432 =====
1432   c h a p t e r 12.7    Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine
                                    Incision                As necessary to relieve skin contractures on the hands

                                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 20–40 mg/kg iv up to 1 g.

                                    Surgical time           1–2 h. Positioning, iv placement, and sedation/anesthesia are time consuming, often longer than
                                                            the procedure itself.

                                    EBL                     < 100 mL

                                    Postop care             PACU → home. Return in 2 wk for intraop removal of cast, dressing change, and first splint ap-
                                                            plication. Splinting and special gloves are the mainstay of postop treatment.

                                    Mortality               None associated with procedure

                                    Morbidity               Trauma from positioning and monitoring → new blisters

                                    Pain score              7–9 (similar to 2nd-degree burns)

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               1–20 yr; older patients with precancerous or cancerous hand lesions
                                    Male:Female             2–3:1

                                    Incidence               Extremely rare

                                    Etiology                Inherited

                                    Associated              Malnutrition; esophageal strictures; generalized skin contractures; malignant transformation of
                                      conditions            skin lesions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   EB is a heterogenous group of rare hereditary disorders characterized by blister formation in the skin in response to
                                   minor trauma, friction, or pressure. The most minor form of EB is EB simplex, in which the blisters heal without scar-
                                   ring. The junctional form often is diagnosed at birth, with blisters caused by the physical trauma of delivery. These
                                   patients develop severe scarring and have a short life expectancy. Patients with the recessive dystrophic form may
                                   have strictures of the oropharynx, larynx, and esophagus. Patients may be on long-term corticosteroid treatment.
                                   Periop hydrocortisone treatment may be required to compensate for adrenal suppression.

                                   Airway                    A careful airway evaluation is essential because these patients may have a difficult airway
                                                             2° mucous membrane and skin involvement in the area of the oropharynx, face, and neck.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                             Patients with EB also may have limited mouth opening and neck movement as the result of
                                                             scarring and contractures. Poor dentition: 3 for loose teeth.

                                   Skin                      Because of the fragility of skin and mucous membranes in patients with EB, the anesthetic
                                                             plan should be designed to minimize trauma to skin and mucous membranes. Friction and
                                                             shearing forces, not direct pressure, are responsible for new bullae and wound formation.

                                   Gastrointestinal          The most common sites of involvement are the oropharynx, esophagus, and anus. Dyspha-
                                                             gia, esophageal stricture, and constipation are common and are the major causes of morbid-
                                                             ity, nutritional deficiencies, and growth retardation. Esophageal dilatation, insertion of NG
                                                             feeding tubes, gastrostomy, and colonic interposition have been performed in patients with
                                                             EB. Esophageal stricture increases the risk of regurgitation and aspiration, and precautions
                                                             to avoid aspiration should be taken.

                                   Musculoskeletal           Skin lesions can be painful, and some patients will be on chronic opiate medication for pain
                                                             management.

===== PAGE 1433 =====
Surgery for Epidermolysis Bullosa           1433

                    Hematologic                Chronic blood loss from denuded skin can → anemia and hypoalbuminemia.
                                               Tests: CBC

                    Laboratory                 Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication              Adequate premedication is essential to minimize movement during induction. An orally
                                               administered combination of midazolam (0.6 mg/kg) and ketamine (3.5 mg/kg) facilitates
                                               the atraumatic placement of iv lines in the OR. Glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg can be given as
                                               antisialagogue. EMLA cream can be applied without adhesive dressing.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Patients are placed on sheepskin to cushion pressure points. The following should be available: Albolene liquefying
                   cleanser, Surg-O-Flex (flexible tubular bandage), Vaseline gauze, Zeroform, Kerlix, Webril, cotton umbilical tape,
                   Mepitel dressing, and Coban wrap. No adhesive tape is used. Adhesive portions of EKG leads and electrocautery
                   dispersion plates are removed; the leads and plates are secured to the patient, using Webril or Surg-O-Flex. BP cuff
                   must be applied over multiple layers of cotton padding. Carefully trim the adhesive off the pulse oximetry probe,
                   wrap around the palm or finger, and wrap Coban around the probe. Alternatively, use adult clip-on probe. Anesthesia
                   masks, ETTs, temperature probes, and all attached monitoring equipment are lubricated with Albolene. Venipunc-
                   ture can be difficult, and the iv lines are secured with Vaseline gauze and Coban.
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA is the preferred method of anesthesia when upper airway manipulation is required
                   or airway protection is compromised. Anticipate difficult airway. Planned FOL is safer than DL. Use smaller ETT
                   to avoid formation of laryngeal bullae. ETT and laryngoscope blade, if used, should be well lubricated. Smaller-than
                   normal LMA has been used, with the shaft and cuff lubricated. Secure tube with umbilical tape. The safety of GETA,
                   however, is not well documented in junctional EB patients, where columnar epithelium can be involved. Succinyl-
                   choline should be used with caution due to potential ↑ K+ 2° muscle atrophy, although it has been used safely in many
                   instances. NMRs prolong duration of action 2° ↓ muscle mass and changes in volume of distribution 2° hypoalbu-
                   minemia, which results from ill health and poor nutritional status.
                   IV anesthesia: Ketamine has been utilized for patients with EB undergoing surgical procedures. For anesthesia,
                   use a loading dose of midazolam 0.1–0.2 mg/kg with ketamine 0.25–0.5 mg/kg, followed by a continuous infusion
                   of ketamine (1 mg/kg/h) and midazolam (0.1 mg/kg/h). Glycopyrrolate can be used as an antisialagogue in these
                   patients. Alternatively, propofol (50–100 mg/kg/h) with remifentanil (0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/h), or dexmedetomidine
                   (0.4–0.7 mcg/kg/h) infusions may be used. Titrate both medications according to patient’s response to the surgical
                   stimulation.
                   Inhalation anesthesia: Inhalation anesthesia may also be performed in cases of difficult iv access and low risk of
                   aspiration.
                   Local anesthesia: At our institution, deep local anesthetic infiltration may be used.
                   Regional anesthesia: In some patients with EB, regional anesthesia techniques allow maintenance of airway pa-

                                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                   tency, involve minimal epidermal/dermal damage, and can offer prolonged postop pain relief. Brachial plexus anes-
                   thesia, epidural anesthesia, and spinal anesthesia have been used successfully in patients with EB.

                    Emergence                  Adequate postop analgesia and parental presence in the PACU may help prevent exces-
                                               sive struggling and skin trauma during emergence and recovery. Plastic O2 delivery masks
                                               should be avoided as they have sharp edges. Avoid rectal route for pain management, as
                                               it may cause perianal trauma and blistering. Acetaminophen, ketorolac, and opioids can
                                               be used for postop analgesia. PONV should be avoided by using combination antiemetic
                                               therapy. Pruritus, a common side effect of opiates, should be treated promptly.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Allegaert K, Naulaers G: Gabapentin as part of multimodel analgesia in a newborn with epidermolysis bullosa. Pediatr Anesth
                        2010; 20:958–76.
                     2. Baum VC, O’Flaherty JE: Anesthesia for Genetic, Metabolic and Dysmorphic Syndromes of Childhood, 2nd edition. Lippincott,
                        Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 122–4.
                     3. Borgeat A, Blumenthal S: Postoperative pain management following scoliosis surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008; 21(3):313–6.

===== PAGE 1434 =====
1434   c h a p t e r 12.7      Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery

                                     4. Boschin M, Ellger B, Van Den Heuvel I, et al: Bilateral ultrasound-guided axillary plexus anesthesia in a child with dystrophic
                                        epidermolysis bullosa. Pediatr Anesth 2012; 22:490–507.
                                     5. Fine JD, Johnson LB, Weiner M, et al: Tracheolaryngeal complications of inherited epidermolysis bullosa: cumulative
                                        experience of the national epidermolysis bullosa registry. Laryngoscope 2007; 117(9):1652–60.
                                     6. Herod J, Denyer J, Goldman A, et al: Epidermolysis bullosa in children: pathophysiology, anaesthesia and pain management.
                                        Paediatr Anesth 2002; 12:388–97.
                                     7. Iohom G, Lyons B: Anaesthesia for children with epidermolysis bullosa: a review of 20 years’ experience. EU J Anesthesiol
                                        2000; 18:745–54.
                                     8. Lin YC, Golianu B: Anesthesia and pain management for pediatric patients with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. J Clin
                                        Anesth 2006; 18(4):268–71.
                                     9. Nasr AA, Almathami A, Alhathal N, et al: Combined spinal and epidural anesthesia in a child with pidermolysis bullosa.
                                        Pediatr Anesth 2008; 18:1278–9.
        Pediatric Surgery

===== PAGE 1435 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.8 Surgery for
                                           Craniofacial
                                           Malformations

                                           surgeon
                                           Stephen A. Schendel, MD, DDS, FACS

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Nai Yi Sun, MD
                                           Mary Laughlin, MD
                                           Louise Furukawa, MD

===== PAGE 1436 =====
Surgical Correction of Craniosynostosis
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Premature fusion of cranial sutures, or craniosynostosis, causes various well-recognized patterns of
                                   cranial vault and facial deformities. Rarely, these are related to conditions such as Crouzon, Apert, Saethre-Chotzen,
                                   and Pfeiffer syndromes. Single or multiple sutures can be involved, the most common being the sagittal suture. This
                                   condition is called scaphocephaly, in which the cranial vault is bitemporally narrow, with AP elongation. Anterior
                                   or posterior plagiocephaly involves a single coronal suture or lambdoid suture and is characterized by flattening
                                   of the forehead on the affected side. Oxycephaly (“tower-head deformity”) involves bilateral coronal sutures, with a
                                   flat, high forehead, whereas brachycephaly also involves the cranial base sutures and results in bitemporal bulging,
                                   midfacial hypoplasia, an anterior open bite, and hypertelorism. These patients may have severe sleep apnea and can
                                   pose a challenge for airway management. Trigonocephaly (triangular head shape; Fig. 12.8-1), with a keel-shaped
                                   forehead and hypoteloric tendency, involves the metopic suture.
                                   Surgical correction of these craniofacial anomalies requires a combined plastic surgery and neurosurgery team
                                   approach involving the release or resection of the affected suture and simultaneous correction of the asymmetric
                                    skull by bone-flap repositioning or advancement. Frontal/orbital abnormalities are addressed with bifrontal cra-
                                    niotomy and forehead advancement, along with advancement of the supraorbital bar (fronto-orbital advance-
                                    ment; Fig. 12.8-2). For example, in plagiocephaly, because of the unilateral coronal synostosis, the frontal bone is
                                    retruded and the superior orbital rim is elevated and retruded on this side. Craniectomy is performed, the forehead
                                    is removed, the involved coronal suture is resected, and the supraorbital bar is cut above the orbit and down to the
                                    lateral orbital wall across the midline. The bar is bent, advanced on the involved side—sometimes up to 1.5 cm—and

                                                              Parietal                           +         +
                                                               flaring                           +         +
                                                                                                 +         +
                                                                                                 +         +
                                                                                                 +
                                                                                             +

                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                            +

                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                        +

                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                        +

                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                        +

                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                    +

                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                   +

                                                                                                     Suture fused

                                                                 Temporal
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                narrowing
                                                                          Superior
                                                                         orbital rims
                                                                          recessed
                                                                                                                        Bossing with thickened
                                                                         Frontal bones flattened                           bone at glabella

                                                                                            Mild hypotelorism

                                             Figure 12.8-1. Skull shape abnormalities in metopic synostosis: Regions of reduced
                                             bone deposition (---). Regions of compensatory increased bone deposition (+++).
                                             (From Belfrey ME, Pershing JA, et al: Surgical Treatment of Metopic Synostosis. In:
                                             Pershing JA, Jane JA, eds. Neurosurgical Clinics of North America. WB Saunders,
                                             Philadelphia: 1991, used with permission.)

                            1436

===== PAGE 1437 =====
Surgical Correction of Craniosynostosis         1437

                                       A                                                       B

                               Figure 12.8-2. Fronto-orbital advancement. A: Lines of osteotomy for forehead and
                               supraorbital bar advancement. B: Fronto-orbital advancement in a tongue-in-groove
                               manner and fixation with wires. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley
                               RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven,
                               Philadelphia: 1997.)

                   fixed in this position. Additional bone strips are taken from the posterior cranium and split for use as graft m
                                                                                                                                   aterial;
                   the other bone pieces are replaced and fixed with wires, suture, or restorable plates, which is the most common
                   method now.
                   Patient positioning, type of headrest, and incision all vary, depending on location of the suture abnormality. If the
                   deformity is mostly posterior (e.g., a sagittal or plagiocephaly case), a prone approach with biparietal or midsagittal
                   incision can be used and may be done endoscopically in the younger infant. Resection of the involved suture and bar-
                   rel staving of the cranium, with grafting for reshaping, works well. Reconstruction as above usually is accomplished
                   at ~3–6 mo of age. Brain mass doubles in size the first 6 mo and triples by 3 yr of age, when ~80% of the brain growth
                   is completed (the driving force for cranial vault growth).
                   All procedures are extradural. Dural tears, if they occur, are repaired to prevent CSF leak and CNS infection.
                   In the syndromic cases, the cranial synostosis deformity is treated similarly to the procedure described, usually

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                   before the age of 12 mo, with a view to midfacial advancement of the primary dentition at maturity either by LeFort
                    III or by monobloc advancement with or without distraction. (See p. 1443 LeFort Osteotomies, and p. 1442 Major
                    Secondary Craniofacial Surgical Procedures.)
                   Postsurgical orthopedic distraction devices like the Delaire mask also can be used to encourage midfacial growth.
                   The syndromic cases may require repeat craniotomy and reshaping at a young age if signs of ↑ ICP appear. Other
                   synostotic cases also should be monitored for ↑ ICP and the need for urgent secondary craniotomy. Marchac and
                   Renier detected ↑ ICP in 13% of single-suture synostosis and 42% of multisuture synostosis. ↑ ICP may increase the
                   risk of dural breach during craniotomy 2° cranial bone resorption and thinning.
                   Blood loss can be significant at first incision through the vessel-rich scalp. Rainey clips are applied immediately to
                   minimize blood loss. In anticipation of major blood loss, transfusion should be started with the first incision. Severe
                   life-threatening blood loss can occur if the sagittal sinus is breached, and neurosurgical repair must be accomplished
                   quickly. Elevation of the bone flaps usually causes diffuse bleeding, which is stopped easily with irrigated bipolar
                   cautery and thrombin-soaked sponges. It is useful to have the patient in the reverse Trendelenburg position from
                   the start. Diffuse bleeding at the cut bone edges and over the bone surfaces can be further controlled with bone wax.
                   Focal bleeding from around the orbit and in the temporal fossa region subperiosteally also can be controlled with

===== PAGE 1438 =====
1438   c h a p t e r 12.8   Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                   bone wax. A LeFort/monobloc component to the surgery increases blood loss, especially during the initial mobili-
                                   zation of the facial segment. Local anesthetic with epinephrine injected, and/or on sponge packs for pressure, will
                                   control the diffuse mucosal bleeding. BP control is also paramount. Electrocautery and Ligaclips to larger vessels
                                   (e.g., descending palatine pedicles) may be necessary.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: In older children (> 2 yr), split cranial bone grafts may be required to correct
                                   defects caused by bone-flap advancement. Excision of skull segments is commonly accompanied by rigid fixation.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Craniosynostosis (sagittal, coronal, metopic, lambdoid); syndromes such as Apert and
                                   Crouzon syndromes; ↑ ICP

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Usually supine; prone for correction of lambdoidal suture synostosis or posterior sagittal synos-
                                                           tosis. If entire cranial vault reshaping (multiple sutures), special padded occipital-cheek headrest,
                                                           because pin fixation is not safe until > 2 yr.

                                    Incision               Usually bicoronal, biparietal, Meisterschnitt, midsagittal

                                    Special                Horseshoe headrest, usually pediatric; occasionally, Gardner tongs; Midas Rex craniotomy; re-
                                      instrumentation      sorbable plates and screws

                                    Unique                 Control of ICP — spinal drain may be placed. Blood in room, if transfusion anticipated.
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics            Pediatric: cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 8 h, or vancomycin 10–15 mg/kg q 6 h, and cefotaxime 25–50
                                                           mg/kg q 6 h for oropharyngeal contamination and following dural tears

                                    Surgical time          2–6 h

                                    Closing                Blood loss with Rainey clip removal. Full head-wrap dressing causes head/neck movement →
                                      considerations       bucking.

                                    EBL                    200–800 mL; may be formidable.

                                    Postop care            ICU: 1–2 d (further transfusion often necessary in first 2 h to replace drain losses)

                                    Mortality              0.6–1.6%

                                    Morbidity              Major complications: 14.3%
                                                           Bone infection: 3–7%
                                                           Meningitis
                                                           CSF leak: 4.5%
                                                           ↑ ICP
                                                           Air embolus: < 1%
                                                           Blindness: < 1%
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                           Massive bleeding: < 1%
                                                           Venous thrombosis
                                                           Neurologic injury: Rare

                                    Pain score             4

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              2–24 mo (primary correction)

                                    Male:Female            1:1

                                    Incidence              Nonsyndromic: 1/10,000 births (most sporadic; few familial patterns)
                                                           Crouzon syndrome: 1/25,000
                                                           Apert syndrome: 1/100,000

===== PAGE 1439 =====
Surgical Correction of Craniosynostosis       1439

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Etiology              Idiopathic; however, some are associated with specific genetic conditions (e.g., Crouzon and
                                           Apert syndromes). Other cases may be 2° ↓ brain growth.

                     Associated            Hydrocephalus; ↑ ICP; mental retardation; airway problems; ocular abnormalities; exotropia (29%
                       conditions          Crouzon or Apert syndrome); lagophthalmus; exorbitism

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients may have craniofacial anomalies—particularly Apert and Crouzon syndromes—which are associated with
                   midface hypoplasia, obstructive sleep apnea, and in some cases difficult intubation. Apert syndrome may also be
                   associated with congenital cardiac anomalies. Hence, detailed preop evaluation is necessary. Children with single-
                   suture craniosynostosis are usually healthy. Surgery is often performed between 3 and 6 mo of age, preferably when
                   the infant weighs > 5 kg.

                    Respiratory             Patients with long-standing upper-airway obstruction due to choanal atresia, mandibular
                                            and maxillary hypoplasia, or other causes, may have chronic hypoventilation and hypoxia
                                            and may experience episodes of apnea. If the patient has Sx of acute URI, delay elective
                                            surgery at least 2 wk. The presence of fever, cough, and abnormal chest auscultation neces-
                                            sitates surgical cancellation and pediatric consultation.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Airway                  Be aware of other congenital anomalies affecting the patient’s airway, such as Apert,
                                            Klippel-Feil, Goldenhar, Pierre Robin, Treacher Collins, or Crouzon syndromes. Review
                                            any previous anesthetic records for patient to gain insights into appropriate airway man-
                                            agement (e.g., Video laryngoscope or FOI may be necessary). Consider elective tracheos-
                                            tomy under local anesthesia in patients with severe airway abnormalities.

                    Cardiovascular          Consider the coexistence of congenital cardiopulmonary anomalies, particularly in patients
                                            with Apert syndrome (autosomal dominant trait, craniosynostosis, midface hypoplasia,
                                            syndactyly of hands and feet, ASD, and VSD). Preop evaluation of a patient with a known
                                            or suspected heart defect should include thorough H&P, ECG, Hct, baseline O2 sat, and
                                            echocardiogram. For children with Sx of cardiac dysfunction or those requiring cardiac
                                            medication, it is advisable to consult with a pediatric cardiologist to optimize the patient’s
                                            condition prior to surgery.
                                            Tests: Preop EKG indicated for patients with CHD, CXR, ECHO; others as indicated from
                                            H&P.

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                    Neurological            If only the sagittal suture is involved, ICP is usually normal. If more than one suture is
                                            involved, brain growth will be impaired, the patient will be developmentally delayed, and
                                            intracranial HTN may be present. Older patients presenting for repair are more likely to
                                            show signs and symptoms of elevated ICP. Syndromic craniosynostosis often have associ-
                                            ated hydrocephalus.

                    Hematologic             Surgery in early infancy (< 9 mo) is common; thus, allowable blood loss is small; blood
                                            transfusion usually is required.
                                            Tests: Hct; PT; PTT; T&C blood

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Patients > 9–10 mo old may benefit from premedication with midazolam (0.5 mg/kg po).
                                            Antibiotic prophylaxis for CHD may be warranted. Consult latest AHA guidelines.

===== PAGE 1440 =====
1440   c h a p t e r 12.8   Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Anticipate possible difficult airway. Heat OR to 78–80°. Forced air warmer. Heat all
                                   fluids to body temperature.

                                   Induction               Surgery for craniectomies is extradural. Either mask induction with N2O and inhalational
                                                           agent or iv induction is suitable for the infant with a normal airway. If ICP is suspected
                                                           to be elevated, consider mild hyperventilation after loss of consciousness. For a difficult
                                                           airway, intubation may be facilitated by using Video laryngoscope or FOI while patient is
                                                           anesthetized and spontaneously ventilating. In rare situations, tracheostomy, under seda-
                                                           tion and local anesthesia, may be necessary. Consider suturing ETT to prevent accidental
                                                           extubation in prone cases, as unsutured endotracheal tubes can slip through tape due to
                                                           pooling of oral or nasal secretions.

                                   Maintenance             Maintenance anesthesia with inhalational agent or balanced (iv) anesthesia, and long-
                                                           acting muscle relaxant should be adequate. Surgery may be prolonged. Control of ICP may
                                                           be necessary (see below). A remifentanil infusion 0.1–0.2 mcg/kg/min provides profound
                                                           intraop analgesia, BP control, and allows for rapid awakening.

                                   Emergence               Prompt awakening to allow neurological evaluation is an important goal. Excessive facial
                                                           edema due to prolonged surgery or high blood loss requiring large-volume fluid replace-
                                                           ment, particularly in patients with preoperative sleep apnea, may require the patient to
                                                           remain intubated postoperatively. Check for presence of air leak around ETT in patients
                                                           with significant facial edema to determine readiness for extubation.

                                   Blood and fluid         Anticipate large blood loss.            Have 1–2 U PRBC or whole blood available in the
                                      requirements         IV× 2 (as large as possible)            room. Consider splitting PRBC into aliquots preop-
                                                           LR @:                                   eratively to minimize donor exposure. Use freshest
                                                              4 mL/kg/h – 0–10 kg                  compatible PRBC available for infants to minimize
                                                              + 2 mL/kg/h – 11–20 kg               risk of hyperkalemia. Consider antifibrinolytics
                                                              + 1 mL/kg/h – > 20 kg (e.g., 25 kg   such as Tranexamic acid (loading dose 50 mg/kg,
                                                              = 65 mL/h)                           followed by infusion of 5 mg/kg/h) to decrease
                                                           Warm all fluids.                        intraoperative blood loss and blood transfusion
                                                           Humidify gases.                         needs. Use LR for replacing deficit, maintenance,
                                                                                                   and 3rd-space fluid loss. Replace blood loss with
                                                                                                   colloid and PRBC mL for mL. Warm all fluids
                                                                                                   administered. Significant blood loss begins with
                                                                                                   scalp incision; allowable blood loss is small so that
                                                                                                   it is important to begin transfusion early before
                                                                                                   hypovolemia occurs. Estimation of intraoperative
                                                                                                   blood loss may be difficult because of significant
                                                                                                   loss of blood onto surgical drapes and gowns.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                                                   EBV for an infant in this age group is 80 mL/kg.
                                                                                                   Monitor for signs of coagulopathy and trans-
                                                                                                   fuse FFP and cryoprecipitate platelets as needed.
                                                                                                   Avoid NS (acidosis, ↑ bleeding) in children < 5 yr.
                                                                                                   Beware of ↑ K+ and ↓ Ca++ associated with massive
                                                                                                   transfusion.

                                   Control of ICP          Hyperventilation                        In some cases, it may be desirable to ↓ ICP. This can
                                                           Osmotic diuretic                        be accomplished by ↑ ventilation (PaCO 2 = 25–30
                                                           Loop diuretic                           mm Hg), diuretics (furosemide 0.5–1 mg/kg iv).

===== PAGE 1441 =====
Surgical Correction of Craniosynostosis            1441

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (Appendix D-1).           Arterial cannulation for BP, monitoring of ABG, Hct,
                                               + Arterial line                             electrolytes, etc., ↑ K+ and ↓ Ca++ are most common
                                               ± CVP line                                  following transfusion with whole blood or FFP. VAE
                                               ± Precordial Doppler                        has been reported during craniectomies in infants;
                                               ± Urinary catheter                          hence, a precordial Doppler and CVP line will be
                                                                                           helpful. CVP may be particularly helpful in the infant
                                                                                           with marginal cardiovascular status for volume
                                                                                           assessment and drug administration. Close atten-
                                                                                           tion to ETCO2 and, if available, ETN2 monitoring is
                                                                                           useful. If VAE is suspected, the surgical field should
                                                                                           be flooded and the head lowered immediately. CVP
                                                                                           may be particularly helpful in the infant with mar-
                                                                                           ginal cardiovascular status for volume assessment
                                                                                           and drug administration and if peripheral iv access
                                                                                           is limited. Precordial or esophageal stethoscope is
                                                                                           useful in cases where the patient is turned 180° or in
                                                                                           cases of marginal pulmonary function.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                   Positioning depends on surgical approach; most
                                               3 eyes                                      are performed with patient supine. The head-up
                                                                                           position is commonly used to help decrease venous
                                                                                           pressure and blood loss.

                    Complications              Oculocardiac reflex (OCR) →                 Notify surgeons. If does not resolve, give atropine
                                                 ↓↓ HR and ↓↓ BP                           0.02 mg/kg iv (min 0.1 mg).
                                               VAE
                                                                                           Be prepared to make prompt Dx of VAE (↓ ETCO2,
                                                                                           change in Doppler sounds, ↑ ETN2 ↓ O2 sat, ↓ BP,
                                                                                           ↑ HR) and Rx: notify surgeons, flood wound, ±
                                                                                           head down, aspirate CVP, ± vasopressors. Minimiz-
                                                                                           ing head-up position, avoiding hypovolemia, and
                                                                                           introducing PEEP can help to prevent VAE.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Hypovolemia with ↓ BP                       Inadequate volume replacement may result in ↓ BP
                                               Hypothermia                                 and acidosis. 3 Hct to establish need for further
                                                                                           fluid or blood therapy. Coagulopathy may develop
                                               Airway complications                        postoperatively, check coags to establish need for
                                                                                           blood component therapy.

                                                                                                                                                                 Pediatric Surgery
                                                                                           Excessive facial edema, history of a marginal airway
                                                                                           preoperatively, or severe obstructive sleep apnea
                                                                                           with sensitivity to opioids may necessitate mainte-
                                                                                           nance of a secure airway postoperatively

                    Pain                       Parenteral opioids and acetaminophen (see p. E-4).
                      management

                    Tests                      Follow-up Hct postop                        Transfuse to keep Hct ≥ 30%.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Chiaretti A, Pietrini B: Safety & efficacy of remifentanil infusion in craniosynostosis repair in infants. Ped Neurosurg 2002;
                        36(1):55–6.
                     2. Cladis F, Grunwaldt L, Losee J; Anesthesia for plastic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 821-41.
                     3. Davies DW, Munro IR: The anesthetic management and intraoperative care of patients undergoing major facial osteotomies.
                        Plast Reconstr Surg 1975; 55(1):50–5.

===== PAGE 1442 =====
1442   c h a p t e r 12.8       Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                     4. Farbod F, Kanaan H, Farbod J: Infective endocarditis and antibiotic prophylaxis prior to dental/oral procedures: latest revision
                                        to the guidelines by the American Heart Association published April 2007. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2009; 38(6):626–31.
                                     5. Goobie SM, Meir PM, et al: Efficacy of transexamic acid in pediatric craniosynostosis surgery: a double-blind, placebo-
                                        controlled trial. Anesthesiology 2011; 114(4):862–71.
                                     6. Guzman R, Lobby JF, Schendel SA, Edwards MS: Fronto-orbital advancement using and en bloc frontal bone craniectomy.
                                        Neurosurgery 2011; 68(1 Suppl Operative):68–74.
                                     7. Harris MM, Yemen TA, Davidson A, et al: Venous embolism during craniectomy in supine infants. Anesthesiology 1987;
                                        67(5):816–19.
                                     8. Hayden Gephart MG, Woodard JI, Arrigo RT, et al: Using bioabsorbable fixation systems in the treatment of pediatric skull
                                        deformities leads to good outcomes and low morbidity. Childs Nerv Syst 2012 Oct 26. [Epub ahead of print]
                                     9. Huang M, Mouradian WE, Cohen SR, et al: The differential diagnosis of abnormal head shapes: separating craniosynostosis
                                        from positional deformities and normal variants. Cleft Palate Craniofacial J 1998; 35(3):204–11.
                                    10. Ko EW, Chen OK, Tai IC, Huang CS: Fronto-facial monobloc distraction in syndromic craniosynostosis. Three-dimensional
                                        evaluation of treatment outcome and facial growth. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2012; 41(1):20–7.
                                    11. Koh JL, Gries H: Perioperative management of pediatric patients with craniosynostosis. Anesthesiol Clin 2007; 25(3):465–81.
                                    12. Marchac D, Renier D, Jones BM: Experience with the “Floating Forehead.” Br J Plast Surg 1988; 41(1):1–15.
                                    13. Muhling J: Surgical treatment of craniosynostosis. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery.
                                        Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 877–88.
                                    14. Palmisano BW, Rusy LM: Anesthesia for plastic surgery. In: Gregory GA, ed. Pediatric Anesthesia, 4th edition, Churchill
                                        Livingstone, New York: 2002, 707–45.
                                    15. Posnick JC: Surgical management of Crouzon, Apert and related syndromes. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 863–75.
                                    16. Schindler E, Martini M, Messing-Junger M: Anesthesia for plastic and craniofacial surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB
                                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 810–44.
                                    17. Sticker PA, Shaw TL, DeSouza DG, et al: Blood loss, replacement and associated morbidity in infants and children undergoing
                                        craniofacial surgery. Pediatric Anesthesia 2010; 20(2):150–9.
                                    18. Tessier P: Relationship of craniostenoses to craniofacial dysostoses and to faciostenoses: a study with therapeutic implications.
                                        Plast Reconstruct Surg 1971; 48(3):224–37.
                                    19. Thomas K, Hughes C, Johnson D, et al: Anesthesia for surgery related to craniosynostosis: a review Part 1. Paediatr Anaesth
                                        2012; doiL10.111/j/1460-9595.2012.03927.x
                                    20. Thomas K, Hughes C, Johnson D, et al: Anesthesia for surgery related to craniosynostosis: a review Part 2. Paediatr Anaesth
                                        2013; 23(1):22–7.

                                   Major Secondary Craniofacial Surgical
                                   Procedures
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: These procedures usually are performed on children ≥ 5 yr. There are two basic approaches. The first
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   involves advancement of the upper face and frontal bone, frequently described as a monobloc (Fig. 12.8-3) or fron-
                                   tofacial advancement. Occasionally, a LeFort III osteotomy and advancement may be performed depending on the
                                   anatomy. The second variation, called facial bipartition or periorbital osteotomy, is for correction of telorbitism
                                   (widely spaced eyes), usually accomplished by a combined extra- and intracranial approach, using both plastic and
                                   neurosurgery teams.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Many different variations of the above-named procedures can be performed;
                                   however, from an anesthetic standpoint, they are not significantly different. The use of cranial bone grafts and rigid
                                   fixation have shortened these somewhat lengthy procedures. Other bone grafts, however, from ribs and iliac crest,
                                   are occasionally required. These procedures frequently last ≥ 6 h, and blood loss can be very heavy. Reconstruction of
                                   the forehead and orbital area following a tumor excision, for example, uses a similar approach but requires additional
                                   bone grafts. The use of external or internal distraction devices has eliminated the need for bone grafts and decreased
                                   associated complications such as infection.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Craniofacial malformations; craniofacial deformities; telorbitism or hypertelorism;
                                   craniofacial dysostosis

===== PAGE 1443 =====
Major Secondary Craniofacial Surgical Procedures     1443

                                A                                                           B

                                Figure 12.8-3. Monobloc advancement. A: Lines of osteotomy for monobloc
                                osteotomy. B: Advancement of midface, orbits, and frontal bone, and stabilization with
                                bone grafts and miniplates. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW,
                                Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven,
                                Philadelphia: 1997.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                 Facial Bipartition,
                                             Monobloc/Frontofacial Advancement                                   Periorbital Osteotomies

                     Position                Supine                                                              ⇐

                     Incision                Bicoronal, oral                                                     Bicoronal, infraorbital

                     Special                 Horseshoe headrest, usually pediatric; disimpaction forceps;        ⇐
                       instrumentation       Midas Rex craniotomy; resorbable plates and screws; mini/micro
                                             titanium plates and screws; ± distraction device to supplant bone
                                             grafting and rigid fixation.

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                     Unique                  Control of ICP: spinal drain may be placed, hyperventilation.       ⇐
                       considerations        Blood in room for anticipated transfusion.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 8 h or vancomycin 10–15 mg/kg q 6 h,           ⇐
                                             and cefotaxime 25–50 mg/kg q 6 h for oropharyngeal contami-
                                             nation and following dural tears

                     Surgical time           4–10 h                                                              ⇐

                     Closing                 Blood loss with Rainey clip removal for suturing. Full head-wrap    ⇐
                       considerations        dressing → head/neck movement with awakening.

                     EBL                     400–800 mL; may be formidable                                       ⇐

                     Postop care             ICU: 1–2 d; monitor Hct.                                            ⇐

                     Mortality               0.6–1.6%                                                            ⇐

===== PAGE 1444 =====
1444   c h a p t e r 12.8   Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                    Morbidity              Major complications: 14.3%                                        ⇐
                                                           Bone infection: 3–7%                                              ⇐
                                                           Meningitis                                                        ⇐
                                                           Infection rates higher if:                                        ⇐
                                                              Adults rather than children (10×)                              ⇐
                                                              Longer OR times and longer hospital stay                       ⇐
                                                              Tracheostomy                                                   ⇐
                                                              Foreign body (plates/screws/other alloplast)                   ⇐
                                                              Anterior fossa entered                                         ⇐
                                                              Large dead space (e.g., in adult nongrowing brain)             ⇐
                                                           CSF leak: 4.5%                                                    ⇐
                                                           ↑ ICP                                                             ⇐
                                                           Air embolus: < 1%                                                 ⇐
                                                           Blindness: < 1%                                                   ⇐
                                                           Massive bleeding: < 1%                                            ⇐
                                                           Venous thrombosis                                                 ⇐
                                                           Neurological injury: Rare                                         ⇐

                                    Pain score             6                                                                 6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              3–20 yr

                                    Male:Female            1:1

                                    Incidence              Crouzon syndrome: 1/25,000
                                                           Apert syndrome: 1/100,000

                                    Etiology               Congenital (80%); occasionally trauma or tumor (20%)

                                    Associated             Depends greatly on the syndrome or disease entity. See Craniosynostosis, p. 1436.
                                      conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Craniofacial syndromes often are associated with maxillofacial deformities, mandibular abnormalities and challeng-
                                   ing airway management.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Respiratory              Patients with long-standing upper airway obstruction due to choanal atresia, mandibular
                                                            and maxillary hypoplasia, etc., may have chronic hypoventilation and hypoxia and may
                                                            have apnea episodes. If Sx of acute URI, delay elective surgery at least 2 wk. The presence of
                                                            fever, cough, and abnormal chest auscultation necessitates surgical cancellation and pedi-
                                                            atric consultation.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Airway                   Be aware of other congenital anomalies affecting the airway, such as Apert, Goldenhar,
                                                            Klippel-Feil, Pierre Robin, Treacher Collins, or Crouzon syndromes. Review any previous
                                                            anesthetic records for insights into airway management (e.g., need for Video laryngoscope
                                                            or FOI). Consider elective tracheostomy under local anesthesia in patients with severe
                                                            airway abnormalities.

===== PAGE 1445 =====
Major Secondary Craniofacial Surgical Procedures            1445

                    Cardiovascular         Frequency of CHD is increased in patients with craniofacial abnormalities. Preop evalua-
                                           tion of patient with known or suspected heart defect should include H&P, ECG, Hct, base-
                                           line O2 sat. For children with Sx of cardiac dysfunction or those requiring cardiac medica-
                                           tion, it is advisable to consult with a pediatric cardiologist to optimize patient’s condition
                                           prior to surgery.
                                           Tests: Preop ECG, echocardiogram, CXR indicated for patients with CHD; others as indi-
                                           cated from H&P.

                    Neurological           Neurologic deficits, if any, should be documented preop.

                    Laboratory             Hb/Hct; therapeutic drug levels for patients taking anticonvulsants.

                    Premedication          Premedication is helpful for patients > 1 yr—oral midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg or oral ket-
                                           amine 6 mg/kg about 30–60 min before induction.

                    Pain                   Pain management should be discussed preoperatively. Perioperative nerve blockade can
                                           be considered.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, with special consideration given to associated CHD, pulmonary, and airway problems.

                    Induction              In an otherwise healthy patient, inhalational induction with subsequent placement of iv
                                           lines is appropriate. Muscle relaxants facilitate intubation but should be used only when
                                           adequate mask ventilation can be ensured. An oral RAE ETT is useful for this procedure
                                           and should be secured carefully in place (often by suturing). Intubation in a patient with
                                           airway abnormalities may be facilitated by using an FOI or Glidescope with patient lightly
                                           anesthetized and spontaneously ventilating. In rare situations, tracheostomy, under seda-
                                           tion and local anesthesia, may be necessary.

                    Maintenance            Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-2). Consider use of remifentanil infusion (0.1–
                                           0.2 mcg/kg/min) for supplemental analgesia and to facilitate rapid awakening.

                    Emergence              Extubate trachea when patient is awake and protective airway reflexes have returned.

                    Blood and fluid        Anticipate large blood loss.            The goal of intraop fluid therapy is to replace preop
                       requirements        IV: 18 ga × 1–2                         deficits, intraop fluid, electrolyte, and blood losses,
                                           NS/LR @:                                while providing maintenance fluids. Half of the cal-
                                              4 mL/kg/h – 0–10 kg                  culated deficit (hours fasting × hourly maintenance
                                              + 2 mL/kg/h – 11–20 kg               fluid requirement) generally is replaced during the
                                              + 1 mL/kg/h – > 20 kg                1st h of anesthesia and the balance over the next

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                              (e.g., 25 kg = 65 mL/h)              1–2 h. Surgical manipulation of tissue will cause
                                           Warm fluids.                            3rd-space fluid loss proportional to the degree of
                                                                                   surgical trauma and tissue exposure. It may range
                                                                                   from 0 to 10 mL/kg/h.

                    Control of blood       Deliberate ↓ BP                         Deliberate ↓ BP can be accomplished by use of SNP,
                      loss                                                         esmolol, or potent inhalational agents titrated to
                                                                                   effect (MAP 50–60 mm Hg).

                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. D-1).
                                           Arterial line                           Arterial line is essential for monitoring BP during
                                           ± CVP line                              deliberate ↓ BP and for ABGs and blood chemistries.

===== PAGE 1446 =====
1446   c h a p t e r 12.8      Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                   Control of ICP              Hyperventilation                            For some procedures, it is essential to reduce intra-
                                                               Mannitol                                    cranial volume to facilitate surgical access. If pro-
                                                               Loop diuretics                              longed brain retraction is required, postop cerebral
                                                               CSF drainage (> 1 yr)                       edema may ensue. ↓ ICP by ↑ ventilation (PaCO2 =
                                                                                                           25–30 mm Hg), diuretics (furosemide 0.5–1 mg/kg iv)

                                   Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   Positioning head above the heart facilitates venous
                                                               3 eyes                                      drainage but also increases the incidence of VAE.
                                                                                                           Do not hyperextend or hyperflex the head and neck.
                                                                                                           Flexion of the neck will move the ETT downward
                                                                                                           (mainstem intubation); extension will move the
                                                                                                           ETT upward (cuff leak).

                                   Complications               Displacement of ETT                         Suture ETT to alveolar ridge.
                                                               Oculocardiac reflex (OCR)→ ↓↓               Notify surgeon. If necessary, Rx: atropine 0.02 mg/kg.
                                                               HR
                                                               ↓ BP
                                                               VAE                                         VAE should be suspected if sudden ↑ ETN2, ↓ ETCO2,
                                                               Major blood loss                            ↓ O2 sat, ↓ BP, ↑ HR. Notify surgeon, flood surgi-
                                                                                                           cal field with NS, support patient hemodynamically
                                                                                                           and D/C N2O.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               ↑ ADH secretion                             SIADH or DI may follow brain manipulation and
                                                               Diabetes insipidus (see Appendix            may require pharmacologic intervention for Rx.
                                                               D-1).
                                                               Cerebral edema                              Cerebral edema may → ↑ ICP (headache, N/V, ↓
                                                               Pneumothorax                                mental status, etc.)
                                                               Bleeding                                    Pneumothorax (Sx = ↑ respirations, wheezing, ↓ BP,
                                                                                                           ↓ CO, ↓ O2 sat) may occur 2° rib resection for bone
                                                                                                           graft. 3 CXR.

                                   Pain                        PCA (see p. E-4).                           Regional anesthesia may be considered (infraor-
                                     management                                                            bital block for cleft lip, scalp blocks for frontofacial
                                                                                                           advancement)

                                   Tests                       Hct

                                   Suggested Readings
        Pediatric Surgery

                                     1. Bradley JP, Gabbey JS, Taub PJ, et al: Monobloc advancement by distraction osteogenesis decreases morbidity and relapse.
                                        Plast Reconstr Surg 2006; 118(7):1585–97.
                                     2. Cladis F, Grunwaldt L, Losee J: Anesthesia for plastic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 821–41.
                                     3. David DJ, Cooter RD: Craniofacial infection in 10 years of transcranial surgery. Plast Reconstruct Surg J 1987; 80(2): 213–23.
                                     4. Nargozian C: The airway in patients with craniofacial abnormalities. Paediatr Anaesth 2004; 14(1):53–9.
                                     5. Posnick JC: Surgical management of Crouzon, Apert and related syndromes. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 863–75.
                                     6. Schindler E, Martini M, Messing-Junger M: Anesthesia for plastic and craniofacial surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB,
                                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 810–44.
                                     7. Suresh S, Voronov P: Head and neck blocks for infants, children and adolescents. Pediatr Anesth 2012; (22):81–7.
                                     8. Williams JK, Longaker MT: Surgical complications of craniofacial surgery. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 905–16.

===== PAGE 1447 =====
Cleft Lip Repair—Unilateral/Bilateral       1447

                   Cleft Lip Repair—Unilateral/Bilateral
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Cleft lip may be either unilateral or bilateral, associated frequently with clefts of the alveolus and pal-
                   ate. Surgical repair involves the design and execution of geometric flaps on the medial and lateral sides of the cleft
                   and primary repair of the cleft nasal deformity. The most common unilateral technique is the rotation advancement
                   flap of Millard (Fig. 12.8-4). Multiple bilateral lip repairs have been described, some repairing both sides simultane-
                   ously and some one side at a time (Fig. 12.8-5). Technique depends on the amount of prolabial and lateral element
                   tissue available. Recently, primary nasal repair has been coupled with these bilateral procedures. These nasal repairs
                   involve extensive mobilization of the alar cartilages and transfer of tissue up into the cleft nasal vestibule and floor,
                   with nasal stents often placed. All of these factors can decrease or occlude nasal airway breathing. Although only
                   a minority of neonates has been found to be true nasal obligatory breathers, this should be kept in mind for those
                   postop patients with respiratory distress.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Other approaches commonly performed are those of the Davies- or Tenni-
                   son-type (Z-plasty) lip repairs (Fig. 12.8-6). In large clefts, a lip adhesion may be performed as an initial stage several
                   months before the actual definitive correction of the cleft lip. This procedure basically involves creating a wound
                   on either side and suturing the muscles, mucosa, and skin together. The procedure itself is very short (~45 min).

                                A                                                            C

                                                     B

                                                                                                                                                         Pediatric Surgery

                                                                     E
                                       D

                               Figure 12.8-4. Step-by-step unilateral complete cleft rotation advancement: m = medial
                               mucosal flap; l = lateral mucosal flap. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ,
                               Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-
                               Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 1448 =====
1448   c h a p t e r 12.8   Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                                                             A

                                                                                                                       C
                                                                 B

                                                                                                                        E
                                                                 D

                                             Figure 12.8-5. Banked fork-flap procedure. In the first stage (A-C), bilateral straight
        Pediatric Surgery

                                             line repairs are done after the prolabium is divided vertically into three forks. The central
                                             limb is used to construct the center of the lip. The lateral forks are “banked” at the alar
                                             bases for later use in constructing a columella. At the second stage (D-E), bipedicle flaps
                                             from the nasal floor, which include the banked forks, are used in combination with a
                                             membranous septum incision to elongate the columella and increase tip projection.
                                             (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and
                                             Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997. After Millard
                                             DR Jr: Closure of bilateral cleft lip and elongation of columella by two operations at
                                             infancy. Plast Reconstr Surg 1971; 47:324–31.)

                                   Presurgical orthopedic devices may be placed and manipulated, instead of a lip adhesion, to bring a wide, bony cleft
                                   into better opposition for a tension-free complete repair. These are custom-fitted and may be fixed with pins to the
                                   palate. They are removed in the OR at time of repair.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cleft lip/palate

===== PAGE 4 =====
Cleft Lip Repair—Unilateral/Bilateral   1449

                                Figure 12.8-6. Z-plasty closure of lip. (Reproduced with permission from McCarthy
                                JG, ed: Plastic Surgery. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1990).

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine; table rotated either 90° or 180°, with oral RAE or reinforced tube toward chin; pa-
                                            tient’s head at the edge of head of bed; shoulder roll; neck extended; entire face exposed;
                                            scleral shields

                     Incision               Medial and lateral cleft margins into the nose and in the maxillary vestibule on the cleft side

                     Special                *Throat pack (NB: 3 removal before extubation); oral RAE or anode tube.
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Local anesthesia with epinephrine injected after lip and nose markings complete. Pediatric
                       considerations       patients should wake up in an unagitated state because undue crying may place excessive
                                             tension on the repair. Immediate elbow restraints for children × 2 wk.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 25 mg/kg iv

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                     Surgical time          1.5 h (bilateral usually ½ h longer)
                                            Lip adhesion: 45 min

                     Closing                Nasal stent; swelling and ointment may occlude nasal airway; smooth emergence important.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    5–10 mL (higher with palatoplasty)

                     Postop care            Elbow restraints × 2 wk; PACU → room overnight → home POD 1.

                     Mortality              Minimal

                     Morbidity              Infection
                                            Wound breakdown
                                            Hypertrophic scars

                     Pain score             4

===== PAGE 5 =====
1450   c h a p t e r 12.8      Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                  1 wk–6 mo

                                    Male:Female                2:1—cleft lip and palate. Isolated cleft palate more common in females.

                                    Incidence                  1/750 for Caucasians; more common in Asians; less in African Americans. Left cleft more com-
                                                               mon than right; both more common than bilateral, in the ratio of 6:3:1.

                                    Etiology                   Multifactorial, including both genetic and environmental aspects

                                    Associated                 Associated anomalies are seen in ~29% of cleft lip cases and may include major chromosomal
                                      conditions               deletions and/or duplications, along with possible severe mental retardation and CHD.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lip and Nose Surgery (p. 1460).

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Arosarena OA: Cleft lip and palate. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2007; 40(1):27–60.
                                     2. Gundlach KKH: Etiology, prevalence, growth and trends in cleft lip, alveolus and palate. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA,
                                        Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 991–1003.
                                     3. Liao YF, Hsieh YJ, Chen IJ, Ko WC, Chen PK: Comparative outcomes of two nasoalveolar molding techniques for unilateral
                                        cleft nose deformity. Plast Reconstr Surg 2012; 130(6):1289–95.
                                     4. Mommaerts Y: The traditional ‘Millard’ approach to lip and palate repair. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1029–45.
                                     5. Mulliken JB: Primary repair of bilateral cleft lip and nasal deformity. Plast Reconstr Surg 2001; 108(1):181–94.
                                     6. Schendel SA: Unilateral cleft lip repair–state of the art. Cleft Palate-Craniofac J 2000; 37(4):335–41.
                                     7. Sullivan WG: Respiratory distress following cleft lip repair: the role of obligatory nasal breathing in the infant. Ann Plast Surg
                                        1988; 20(6):590–2.
                                     8. Winters JC, Hurwitz DJ: Presurgical orthopedics in the surgical management of unilateral cleft lip and palate. Plast Reconstruct
                                        Surg J 1995; 95(4):755–64.

                                   Palatoplasty
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Cleft palate can be seen as either an isolated condition or in conjunction with clefting of the lip. The
                                   mildest form of cleft palate is the submucous, or occult cleft, in which there is no visible cleft but, rather, a nonunion
                                   of the soft-palate muscles. This is followed by the incomplete soft-palate cleft and, finally, the complete cleft, which
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   includes soft and hard palates and may extend through the alveolar portion of the maxilla. Repair involves mobilizing
                                   the lateral soft tissue and moving it toward the midline to close the cleft and elongate the palate, if necessary. The most
                                   important goal of cleft-palate repair is the attainment of normal speech. Children with unrepaired or inadequately
                                   repaired clefts develop nasal-sounding speech patterns termed rhinolalia. Cleft-palate repair, therefore, usually is
                                   done when the child is 9–18 mo old, before consequential speech development. In addition to closing the cleft itself,
                                   an important goal of palate repair is normal anatomic approximation of the levator palati muscles, which are re-
                                   sponsible for oronasal valving in speech and swallowing. The cleft palate is closed by elevating the mucoperiosteum
                                   from the underlying bones and approximating it in the midline (von Langenbeck technique; Fig. 12.8-7) or using
                                   a V-Y type of retrodisplacement and closure (Wardill-Kilner technique). In either method, the levator muscles are
                                   specifically dissected and the levator sling is reconstructed. A layered closure usually is accomplished, including
                                   repositioning of the uvular muscles.
                                   There are several different approaches to the muscle reconstruction in the soft palate, generally termed intravelar-
                                   veloplasties. Z-plasty of the soft palate, also called a Furlow procedure (Fig. 12.8-8), has been used to lengthen the
                                   palate and reorient the palatal muscles across the cleft. The other procedures basically involve direct closure of the
                                   muscles and a push-back to lengthen the palate.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cleft palate

===== PAGE 6 =====
Palatoplasty   1451

                                                                                             B

                                                     A

                                                 C                                   D

                                Figure 12.8-7. Palatoplasty technique. A: Cleft palate closure after healing of
                                gingivoperiosteoplasty at 11–12 mo of age. Bilateral, unipedicled mucoperiosteal flaps,
                                based on the greater palatine arteries, are elevated. B: Anteriorly, the nasal floor is
                                repaired by suturing the vomerine mucosa to the nasal mucosa on the cleft side. C: The
                                levator muscles are dissected free from the oral and nasal mucosa and released from the
                                posterior edge of the hard palate. The levator muscles are approximated to each other
                                in the midline. D: The oral mucosa is reapproximated in the midline with interrupted
                                horizontal mattress sutures. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW,
                                Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven,
                                Philadelphia: 1997.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery

                     Position                Supine; table rotated 90°–180° with oral RAE tube extending down the midline of the lower jaw
                                             and taped to the chin.

                     Incision                Edges of the cleft palate and, possibly, the alveolar and pterygomandibular raphe areas.

                     Special                 Dingman mouth gag (when setting the gag, communication between surgeon and anesthetist
                       instrumentation       allows ETT compression to be noted early); usually, a headlight; oropharyngeal pack

                     Unique                  The gag may be released intermittently to allow reperfusion of the tongue; each manipulation
                       considerations        may affect the ETT. Minimal-to-moderate amount of blood in the oropharynx at end of procedure,
                                             should be carefully suctioned. Also, there may be some respiratory difficulties on emergence.
                                             Traction with a tongue suture often proves helpful in restoring patient’s airway (maintained 24 h).
                                             Usually, oral or nasopharyngeal airways should not be placed in children.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 5–6 h (up to 1 g) × 5 d

===== PAGE 7 =====
1452   c h a p t e r 12.8    Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Surgical time           1–1.5 h

                                    Closing                 Child should not wake up crying and hypertensive. Tongue suture may be placed prior to extuba-
                                      considerations        tion. NB: Dingman gag will stick to the ETT; therefore, holding the tube with a forceps deep in
                                                            the oropharynx and careful removal of the gag avoids accidental extubation.

                                    EBL                     50 mL

                                    Postop care             Elbow restraints; PACU → room; → home next day. OG tube placed, suctioned, and removed.

                                    Mortality               Rare

                                    Morbidity               Recurrent bleeding (requiring early return to OR): Rare
                                                            Hematoma under palate
                                                            Dehiscence of palate

                                    Pain score              4

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               6–18 mo

                                    Male:Female             1:3 (isolated cleft palate)

                                    Incidence               1/1000

                                    Etiology                Failure of fusion of the palatal shelves from anterior to posterior. (Can be due to a persistent
                                                            high-tongue position in utero, increased facial width, reduced facial mesenchyme and/or drugs
                                                            such as steroids, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines, or infection.)

                                    Associated              Multiple associated conditions. Most common is the Pierre Robin syndrome, in which cleft palate
                                      conditions            is found in association with glossoptosis and a micrognathic retruded mandible. These children
                                                            frequently have airway obstruction and, even at an older age, may have sleep apnea. Other
                                                            associations include Klippel-Feil syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome, CHD, chronic URI, chronic
                                                            otitis media, subglottic stenosis.

                                       A                                                  B                                     C
        Pediatric Surgery

                                               Figure 12.8-8. Double opposing Z-plasty closure of an isolated cleft palate. A: Design
                                               of the incisions. B: Muscle included in the posteriorly based flap. C: Final result with
                                               recreation of the levator sling. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley
                                               RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven,
                                               Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 8 =====
Pharyngoplasty    1453

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lip and Nose Surgery, p. 1460.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Arosarena OA: Cleft lip and palate. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2007; 40(1):27–60.
                     2. Gundlach KKH: Etiology, prevalence, growth and trends in cleft lip, alveolus and palate. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA,
                        Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 991–1003.
                     3. Kirschner RE, Wang P, Jawad AF, et al: Cleft-palate repair by modified Furlow double-opposing Z-Plasty: The Children’s
                        Hospital of Philadelphia Experience. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 1999; 104(7):1998–2014.
                     4. Mommaerts Y: The traditional ‘Millard’ approach to lip and palate repair. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen, J-E, eds.
                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1029–45.

                   Pharyngoplasty
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Following the initial repair of palatal clefts, some children or young adults demonstrate continued
                   hypernasal speech patterns, a condition called “velopharyngeal incompetence.” This can be 2° a short soft palate, a
                    large nasopharynx, or a soft palate that has inadequate movement either 2° scarring or due to neurogenic problems.
                    The typical repair would be a palatal Z-plasty or superiorly based pharyngeal flap (Fig. 12.8-9) to the soft palate.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: The Jackson modification of the Orticochea flap uses the posterior tonsillar
                   pillars, which consist of the palatopharyngeus muscle and overlying mucosa, to create a competent oronasal sphinc-
                   ter (Fig. 12.8-10). The flaps are based superiorly and repositioned horizontally to meet above and behind the soft pal-
                   ate. Although they act to augment the posterior pharyngeal wall, they also are intended to maintain their innervation

                                              Incisions                                     Insertion of flap into soft palate

                                                                                                                                                           Pediatric Surgery

                                                                Midline split
                                                                in soft palate

                                                                                                                       Mucosal flaps on
                                                                                                                       nasal surface of
                            A                                                              B                           soft palate

                                Figure 12.8-9. Pharyngeal flap, superiorly based. (Reproduced with permission
                                from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                                Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 9 =====
1454   c h a p t e r 12.8    Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                   and, therefore, augment sphincter activity. A posterior pharyngeal wall implant also may be placed. Obstructive sleep
                                   apnea may be caused by these procedures and may make airway management difficult.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Velopharyngeal incompetence

                                                                         A                Incisions

                                                                         B   Flaps raised with palatopharyngeus
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                         C                 Closure

                                             Figure 12.8-10. Sphincter pharyngoplasty. (Reproduced with permission from Booth
                                             PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                                             Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 10 =====
Pharyngoplasty      1455

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine, table rotated 90° or 180°; oral RAE tube extending down the midline chin and taped in position.

                     Incision                 Involves incisions in soft and hard palates and in the posterior pharyngeal wall.

                     Special                  Dingman mouth gag (caution with removal and manipulation re ETT); headlight
                       Instrumentation

                     Unique                   Avoid oral or nasopharyngeal airways or nasal suctioning.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics+ other       Cefazolin 25 mg/kg q 6–8 h (up to 1 g) × 3 d; periop steroids, depending on preop airway.
                       meds

                     Surgical time            1–1.5 h

                     Closing                  Pediatric patients should not become hypertensive (↑ bleeding).There will be some nasopharyn-
                       considerations         geal drainage; thorough oral suctioning is important.

                     EBL                      50–100 mL

                     Postop care              Avoid postop oral or nasopharyngeal airways or nasal suctioning. Be aware of possible occlusion
                                              of nasopharynx with flap and bleeding. Tongue suture can be placed for 24 h.

                     Mortality                Rare

                     Morbidity                Recurrent bleeding
                                              Hematoma under palate
                                              Dehiscence of palate
                                              Nasopharyngeal obstruction
                                              Secondary sleep apnea

                     Pain score               4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                3–11 yr most common

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                ~15% of children undergoing cleft palate repair will need some type of secondary palatal length-
                                              ening procedure after 3 yr.

                     Etiology                 Short and scarred palate; neurogenic palate; palate-to-pharyngeal ratio that is too small.

                     Associated               Sleep apnea; Pierre Robin sequence, with glossoptosis and micrognathia. Treacher Collins syn-

                                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery
                       conditions             drome; microtia with craniofacial malformation; subglottic stenosis; CHD. Of special interest:
                                              some patients with cleft palate may have velocardiofacial syndrome. These children may have
                                              medially displaced internal carotid arteries, placing these major arteries in harm’s way dur-
                                              ing dissection along the posterior pharyngeal wall.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lip and Nose Surgery (p. 1460).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Boorman JG, Bharathwaj S: Secondary palatal surgery and pharyngoplasty. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1083–99.
                     2. Ettinger RE, Oppenheimer AJ, Lau D, et al: Obstructive sleep apnea after dynamic sphincter pharyngoplasty. J Craniofac Surg
                        2012; 23(7 Suppl 1):S32–4.
                     3. Jackson IT: Sphincter pharyngoplasty. Clin Plastic Surg 1985; 12(4):711–17.
                     4. Markus AF, Precious DS: Secondary surgery for cleft lip and palate. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds.
                        Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1057–72.

===== PAGE 11 =====
1456   c h a p t e r 12.8      Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                     5. Ruda JM, Krakovitz P, Rose AS: A review of the evaluation and management of velopharyngeal insufficiency in children.
                                        Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2012; 45(3):653–69.
                                     6. Sloan GM: Posterior pharyngeal flap and sphincter pharyngoplasty: the state of the art. Cleft Palate Craniofac J 2000;
                                        37(2):112–22.

                                   Also see Suggested Readings for Cleft Lip (p. 1460).

                                   Alveolar Cleft Repair with Bone Graft
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Alveolar cleft occurs as both bony and soft-tissue
                                   defects in the alveolar portion of the maxilla in the position of
                                   the lateral incisor tooth; thus, an oral/nasal fistula exists with this
                                   deformity. The size of the cleft is variable; it may be unilateral or
                                   bilateral and is associated with cleft lip and palate. The alveolar
                                   segments are often collapsed such that orthodontic expansion is
                                   required before bone graft and repair. These devices are main-
                                   tained to stabilize the graft in situ for a 3-mo healing period. The
                                   surgical procedure involves raising mucosal-gingival-periosteal
                                   flaps, advancing them, and performing a layered closure, start-
                                   ing with the nasal floor and working toward the oral cavity. A                    A
                                   bone graft is placed in between these two layers to consolidate
                                   the upper arch. Cancellous bone usually is taken from the iliac
                                   crest or corticocancellous bone from the outer table of the skull.
                                   Most commonly, the bone is harvested from the ilium. This can
                                   be accomplished via limited access and a trephine or via an open
                                   technique, depending on the amount of bone required. This por-
                                   tion of the procedure, especially by open technique, can add
                                   50–100 mL of blood loss. Most nasal and lip revision surgery                      B
                                   should be put off until the alveolus is reconstructed because this
                                   is the base on which the lip and nose sit.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: In young children, the                         Figure 12.8-11. Gingivoalveoloplasty
                                   alveolar cleft procedure may be performed without the use of                   (GAP). Gingival and mucosal incisions
                                    bone grafts at the time of lip or hard palate closure (gingivoal-              are shown on the palate (A) and vestibular
                                    veoloplasty, Fig. 12.8-11) with the hope that preop alignment                  (B) surfaces, extending along the cleft
                                    of the clefted alveolus and periosteal creation of new bone will               borders. (Reproduced with permission
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    fill the bony defect and allow subsequent normal tooth eruption.               from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen
                                    This is not always complete, and some of these children will need              J-E, eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill
                                    later bone grafting at age 7–8 yr, before eruption of the perma-
                                                                                                                   Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)
                                    nent canine teeth.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Congenital alveolar cleft

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                  Supine; table rotated 90°–180° ± roll under hip (bone harvest)

                                    Incision                  Oral, with the addition of iliac crest incision or scalp incision, either parasagittal or coronal

                                    Special                   Throat pack; Dingman mouth gag; headlight. Two instrument setups used, to prevent cross-
                                      instrumentation         contamination from oral to iliac surgical sites.

                                    Unique                    Important to ensure that the hip iliac crest bone graft site is on the opposite side from the anes-
                                      considerations          thesiologist if the table is rotated only 90°. Midline oral RAE tube to chin. Care when manipulating
                                                              Dingman, as it sticks to ETT.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Secondary Cleft Lip/Nasal Surgery           1457

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg (up to 1 g) iv preop

                     Surgical time           1.5–2.5 h

                     Closing                 *NB: Ensure that throat pack has been removed. Pediatric patients should not wake up in agi-
                       considerations        tated state. Non-cleft-side oral mouth gag and gentle oral suctioning permissible; avoid nasal
                                             suctioning, especially from the cleft side.

                     EBL                     100–200 mL

                     Postop care             PACU → ward; walking POD 1 or 2 postiliac graft.

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Bone graft loss: 2–10%
                                             Infection: 2–10%
                                             Refistulization: 2–10%
                                             Prolonged hip discomfort (bone graft donor site)
                                             Bleeding—oral or at bone donor site

                     Pain score              6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               8–12 yr

                     Male:Female             2:1

                     Incidence               Unknown

                     Etiology                Multifactorial, including both genetic and environmental aspects

                     Associated              Associated anomalies are seen in ~29% of cleft lip cases and may include major chromosomal
                       conditions            deletions and/or duplications, with the possibility of severe developmental delay, CHD.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lip and Nose Surgery (p. 1460).
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Brusati R, Mannucci N: Primary repair of the lip and palate using the Delaire philosophy. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA,
                        Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1005–28.
                     2. Posnick JC: Craniofacial and Maxillofacial Surgery in Children and Young Adults. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2000,

                                                                                                                                                            Pediatric Surgery
                        785–980.
                     3. Stassen LFA: Alveolar bone grafting–how I do it. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery.
                        Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999, 1047–55.
                     4. Trindade-Suedam IK, da Silva Filho OG, Carvolho RM, et al: Timing of alveolar bone grafting determines different outcomes
                        in patients with unilateral cleft palate. J Craniofac Surg 2012; 23(5):1283–6.
                     5. Wolfe SA, Kawamoto HK: Taking the iliac bone graft: a new technique. J Bone Joint Surg 1978; 60-A(3):411.

                   Also see Suggested Readings for Cleft Lip, p. 1460.

                   Secondary Cleft Lip/Nasal Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Secondary deformities of the nose and lip develop, following the initial repair of either bilateral or
                   unilateral cleft lip deformities. These subsequent deformities depend on the extent of the initial congenital anomaly,

===== PAGE 13 =====
1458   c h a p t e r 12.8     Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                               Figure 12.8-12. Z-plasty to correct notching of the vermillion border. (Reproduced
                                               with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic
                                               Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997. Originally from Millard DR
                                               Jr: Cleft Craft: The Evolution of Its Surgery. Little & Brown, 1976.)

                                   the quality of the surgical repair, and resulting oral/facial function. Revision can vary from a minimal scar revision
                                   (Fig. 12.8-12) to a complete opening and reconstruction of the lip and nose, with or without ancillary procedures
                                   such as septorhinoplasty ± cartilage grafting, forked flaps (Fig. 12.8-13), fascial lip augmentation, or Abbe-
                                   Estlander flap (lip-switch flap; Fig. 12.8-14).
                                   Occasionally, the individual born with a cleft lip and palate is severely deficient in tissue of the upper lip. This occurs
                                   most frequently in the bilateral condition. Correction involves switching tissue from the midline of the lower lip to the
                                   central portion of the upper lip, maintaining a pedicle of soft tissue between the lips, which usually contains the labial
                                   artery on one side. This pedicle normally is cut between 7–11 d. The redundant tissue in the midportion of the upper
                                   lip is transferred to the columellar portion of the nose at the same time, which elongates this section (Fig. 12.8-14). To
                                   avoid disruption of the flap, the older child should be cautioned to avoid wide mouth opening in the postop period.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Secondary cleft deformity
        Pediatric Surgery

                                               Figure 12.8-13. Short columella associated with the bilateral cleft nose, elongated by
                                               forked flaps. (Reproduced with permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds:
                                               Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine, table rotated 90°–180°; oral RAE; nasal RAE tube when working on lips only (especially if
                                                             lips are held closed by a flap pedicle, making extubation more difficult).

                                    Incision                 Variable, in lip or nasal areas. (See Figs. 12.8-12, 12.8-13, and 12.8-14.)

                                    Special                  Throat pack; possibly rhinoplasty instruments; oral RAE tube; head light; loupe magnification.
                                      instrumentation

===== PAGE 14 =====
Secondary Cleft Lip/Nasal Surgery         1459

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Unique                  Procurement of a cartilage graft is usually from the nasal septum or ear; thus, the head may
                       considerations        need to be turned to one side and this area also prepped. Elbow restraints for children. A switch
                                             flap leaves the lips connected at their midportion by a thin, easily damaged, soft-tissue pedicle;
                                             therefore, the patient should wake up unagitated.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 25 mg/kg (up to l g) iv preop

                     Surgical time           Variable, depending on the extent of revision: 0.5–3 h

                     Closing                 *NB: Remove throat pack.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal–75 mL

                     Postop care             May be obligatory mouth breathing postrhinoplasty, or lips may be held mostly closed by the
                                             pedicle and swelling of a lip-switch flap; consider oral-pharyngeal airway; avoid wide mouth open-
                                             ing. PACU → room; elbow restraints in young children.

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Infection
                                             Wound breakdown
                                             Flap necrosis: < 1% (with lip switch)
                                             Bleeding

                     Pain score              3–5 (depending on extent of procedure)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               2–50 yr

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               20–60% of patients with primary clefts

                     Etiology                Unsatisfactory outcome of previous lip/nose surgery

                     Associated              Associated anomalies are seen in ~29% of the clefts and may include major chromosomal dele-
                       conditions            tions or duplications, with a possibility of severe mental retardation.

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery

                                Figure 12.8-14. Abbe-Estlander flap. Note lips sutured together. (Reproduced with
                                permission from Converse JM, ed: Reconstructive Plastic Surgery, Vol 3, 2nd edition.
                                WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1977.)

===== PAGE 15 =====
1460   c h a p t e r 12.8     Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Lip and Nose Surgery, p. 1460.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Cladis F, Grunwaldt L, Losee J: Anesthesia for plastic surgery. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK eds. Smith’s Anesthesia
                                        for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia. 2011, 821–41.
                                     2. Sadove AM, Eppley BL: Correction of secondary cleft lip and nasal deformities. Clin Plastic Surg 1993; 20(4):793–801.
                                     3. Schindler E, Martini M, Messing-Junger M: Anesthesia for plastic and craniofacial surgery. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB
                                        eds. Pediatric Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 810–44.
                                     4. Talmant JC: Cleft rhinoplasty. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                                        Edinburgh: 1999, 1133–71.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR LIP AND NOSE SURGERY
                                   (Procedures covered: cleft lip repair; palatoplasty; pharyngoplasty; alveolar cleft repair with bone graft; sec-
                                   ondary cleft lip/nasal surgery)

                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   The anesthesiologist should be aware of the parents’ feelings about their child with a congenital malformation. The
                                   whole family needs to be treated with sensitivity and compassion. Cleft lip closure may be carried out as early as
                                   the first week of life in the healthy neonate; however, many surgeons and anesthesiologists find the Kilner’s rule
                                   of 10 helpful: the child should have an Hb >10 g, be 10 wk old, and weigh 10 lbs. The hard palate usually is closed
                                   between the ages of 1 and 5 yr; however, the soft palate should be closed prior to speech development (12–15 mo).
                                   Palatoplasty and pharyngoplasty usually are carried out from 1–15 yr. Patients with these midline facial defects
                                    are most likely to have other associated anomalies, including CHD, subglottic stenosis, and Pierre Robin or Treacher
                                    Collins syndrome. In patients with severe OSA, postop edema may impair ventilation. The possibility of remaining
                                    intubated postop should be discussed with the surgical team and the family.

                                   Respiratory                 Careful assessment is necessary as associated anomalies may affect airway or lungs.
                                                               Chronic otitis 2° eustachian tube dysfunction is common. Treat with antibiotics before
                                                               surgery. Postpone surgery (~2 wk) if Sx of acute URI present (e.g., runny nose, fever, sore
                                                               throat, cough). Chronic aspiration may be associated with cleft lip/palate.
                                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Airway                      Be aware of other congenital anomalies affecting the airway, such as Apert, Goldenhar,
                                                               Klippel-Feil, Pierre Robin, or Treacher Collins syndrome. Review any previous anesthetic
                                                               records for insights into airway management. Consider fiberoptic intubation (FOI or Video
                                                               laryngoscope) in patients with suspected difficult airway. Also consider elective tracheos-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                               tomy under local anesthesia in patients with severe airway abnormalities. Patients with
                                                               severe subglottic stenosis may require preop tracheostomy. Patients with difficult airways
                                                               or severe obstructive sleep apnea undergoing palatal surgery should be evaluated for ICU
                                                               monitoring postoperatively.

                                   Cardiovascular              CHD is frequently associated with cleft palate. Preop evaluation of a patient with a known
                                                               or suspected heart defect should include thorough H&P, EKG, Hct, baseline O2 sat, and
                                                               CXR. For children with Sx of cardiac dysfunction or those requiring cardiac medication,
                                                               it is advisable to consult with a pediatric cardiologist to optimize the patient’s condition
                                                               prior to surgery.
                                                               Tests: Preop ECG, echocardiogram indicated for patients with CHD; others as indicated
                                                               from H&P

                                   Nutritional                 Infants with cleft lip/palate may have problems with oral feeding. Assess nutritional status
                                                               from physical exam and by comparison to expected growth for age.
                                                               NB: NPO after midnight for solids. Patients should continue to have breast milk until 4 h
                                                               preop and clear liquids up until 2 h preop.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Secondary Cleft Lip/Nasal Surgery          1461

                    Neurological          Delayed development of speech is common in the older child with cleft palate. Some of
                                          these children may be hearing impaired. Preop preparation and discussion is important to
                                          minimize the impact of these communication problems.

                    Psychological         Many patients with orofacial congenital malformations require multiple procedures; emo-
                                          tional support and psychological assessment of these patients are essential. Preoperative
                                          visits and consultation with play-therapists can be helpful, particularly if the child with a
                                          difficult airway will need a preoperative iv.

                    Hematologic           High incidence of iron deficiency anemia; T&C for 1 U PRBC (cleft palate).
                                          Tests: Hct

                    Laboratory            Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication         < 9 mo old rarely needs premedication; > 9 mo old may benefit from midazolam (0.5–0.75
                                          mg/kg po); alternatively ketamine (5 mg/kg po) ~30 min preop may be used (rarely). Con-
                                          sider parent present induction for children with separation anxiety provided no difficult
                                          airway is anticipated.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA; warm room to 75–80°F; forced air warmer.

                    Induction             Typically, an inhalational induction (sevoflurane ± N2O/O2) while patient is breathing
                                          spontaneously. Airway obstruction is best treated with an oral airway. Anticipate difficult
                                          laryngoscopy if large, prepalatal cleft present. Intubate with oral RAE tube and secure
                                          in midline of lower lip. In patients with difficult airways, preoperative iv and FOI is the
                                          technique of choice. IV glycopyrrolate and nebulized local anesthetics may facilitate FOI.
                                          Include amount of inhaled local anesthetic into the calculated max allowable local anes-
                                          thetic to avoid toxicity. Avoid muscle relaxants for difficult intubations until ETT is placed.
                                          For children with difficult airways and a small posterior pharynx, consider preop dexa-
                                          methasone 0.5 mg/kg iv to decrease palatal edema.
                                          After induction, consider morphine 0.1 mg/kg, ketamine 0.1 mg/kg for analgesia.

                    Maintenance           Standard pediatric maintenance (see p. D-3) ± muscle relaxant. Airway is shared with the
                                          surgeons. The Dingman mouth gag is used for surgical exposure and may inadvertently
                                          compress the ETT or cause an endobronchial intubation. Monitor PIP before and after
                                          placement of Dingman. Flexion of the neck also may cause endobronchial intubation.
                                          Extension of the neck may cause complete or partial extubation. Adequacy of ventilation
                                          should be checked after every position change. Bilateral breath sounds should be equal
                                          after final positioning. In cases with the table turned 180°, a precordial stethoscope placed
                                          over the left chest can help elucidate endobronchial tube migration. ETT should be sutured

                                                                                                                                                     Pediatric Surgery
                                          to the alveolar ridge. In palatoplasty, the palate is infiltrated with epinephrine (in lidocaine
                                          usually) → ↓ blood loss + ↑ dysrhythmias ↑ PaCO2 → ↑ dysrhythmias. Confirm maximal
                                          allowable local anesthetic dose with surgeons.
                                          Moderate risk of airway fire. Reduce FiO2 and consider throat pack if endotracheal tube
                                          leak is substantial. Approx 18 cm H2O or greater if patient requires increased venitilator
                                          pressure. Throat pack insertion and removal can cause inadvertent extubation. Ensure firm
                                          airway connections prior to relinquishing airway. Always have a spare styletted ETT ready
                                          in the event of inadvertent extubation.

                    Emergence             *Pharyngeal (throat) packs are usually placed to prevent aspiration of blood.
                                          NB: Packs must be removed before extubating the trachea. Consider laryngoscopy to
                                          inspect airway and remove blood and clots before extubation. A tongue stitch is useful
                                          postop following cleft palate surgery. It may be used to pull the tongue forward to relieve
                                          postop respiratory obstruction. Extubation in the lateral (tonsillar) position is useful in
                                          promoting drainage of blood and secretions.

===== PAGE 17 =====
1462   c h a p t e r 12.8    Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                   Blood and fluid            IV: 18–22 ga × 1                        Blood loss replaced by 3:1 crystalloid or 1:1 colloid
                                      requirements            NS/LR @:                                (e.g., 5% albumin or 6% hetastarch). Rarely, a blood
                                                                 4 mL/kg/h – 0–10 kg                  transfusion may be indicated for hemorrhage.
                                                                 + 2 mL/kg/h –11–20 kg
                                                                 + 1 mL/kg/h – > 20 kg
                                                                 (e.g., 25 kg = 65 mL/h)

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                                              3 eyes

                                   Complications              Obstructed ETT→ ↑ PIP                   3 ETT to see that it is not partially or completely
                                                              Mucous plugging                         obstructed by mouth gag.
                                                              Hemorrhage                              3 bilateral breath sounds.
                                                              Airway fire                             Inadvertent extubation/endobronchial intubation

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Retained throat pack                    3 for retained throat pack if there are Sx of airway
                                                                                                      obstruction in immediate postop period.
                                                              Airway edema → croup                    Rx of postintubation croup consists of cool, humid-
                                                              Hemorrhage                              ified, 100% O2 mask, or nebulization 2.25% race-
                                                              Obstructive sleep apnea                 mic epinephrine (0.5 mL in 3 mL NS). Racemic
                                                                                                      epinephrine is given for its vasoconstrictor, rather
                                                                                                      than its bronchodilator, effect. If posterior pharyn-
                                                                                                      geal edema is present, consider dexamethasone
                                                                                                      0.5 mg/kg iv.

                                   Pain                       Acetaminophen (10–15 mg/kg po/          Avoid oversedation in patients with Abbe-Estlander
                                     management               iv or 20–30 mg/kg pr) q 6 h             repair 2° airway obstruction. Aim for child to
                                                              Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg iv                    be mildly sedated (decreases bleeding) but not
                                                              Morphine 0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv q 2–3        obstructing; intraop morphine, ketamine helpful to
                                                              h prn                                   ensure smooth awakening.
                                                              Hydrocodone/acetaminophen               Caution for airway obstruction in PACU.
                                                              elixir (Hycet) 0.15 mg/kg po q 6°

                                   Tests                      Hct, if indicated.                      Others as indicated.
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   Otoplasty
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: There are a number of congenital ear malformations. The two most frequently encountered in the OR
                                   are prominent ear and microtia. Both conditions can be unilateral or bilateral.
                                   Prominent ears are usually an isolated finding. The ear is examined in thirds to determine where the prominence
                                   lies, and the surgery is tailored to correct the specific excesses. The antihelical fold is usually flattened and requires
                                   reshaping. The prominence of the ear, as measured by its projection from the mastoid process, is decreased accord-
                                   ingly. This usually involves an elliptical skin incision in the posterior ear area, dissection over the mastoid, and one
                                   or a combination of three techniques—mattress sutures, cartilage scoring, and/or resection.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: All procedures are similar, with minor differences in suturing and amount of
                                   resected tissue. In addition to the posterior incisions, an anterior incision can be used in some approaches.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Otoplasty   1463

                                             A

                                              B
                                                                            D

                                                                                                       E

                                                   C

                               Figure 12.8-15. Fabricating an ear framework from costal cartilage. A: Donor site:
                               the contralateral thorax. The helical rim is obtained from a “floating” rib cartilage, the
                               main pattern from the synchondrosis of two cartilages. B: Sculpting the main block.
                               C: Thinning the “floating” rib cartilage to produce a delicate helical rim. D: Affixing
                               the rim to the main framework block. E: Completed framework. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Aston SJ, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds: Grabb and Smith’s Plastic
                               Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                                                                                                                                                Pediatric Surgery

                               Figure 12.8-16. The cutaneous “pocket.” The vestigial native cartilage is excised; then,
                               a skin pocket is created. To provide tension-free accommodation of the framework,
                               the dissection is carried out well beyond the proposed auricular position. Using two
                               silicone catheters, the skin is coapted to the framework by means of vacuum tube
                               suction. (Reproduced with permission from Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E,
                               eds: Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh: 1999.)

===== PAGE 19 =====
1464   c h a p t e r 12.8    Surgery for Craniofacial Malformations

                                   Microtia is within the congenital anomaly spectrum of hemifacial microsomia, and the associated facial malforma-
                                   tion may include a small asymmetric jaw, creating a difficult intubation. Microtia reconstruction is done by two
                                   philosophically different techniques. The first is by autogenous tissue, usually rib, and is done in multiple stages. The
                                   second technique uses an alloplastic framework and is done in one longer stage. Reconstruction with autologous rib
                                   graft as a multistaged procedure. This donor site comes with the attendant risks of pneumothorax and hemothorax
                                   (Fig. 12.8-15). Stage one is the creation of a cartilaginous framework, with placement into a cutaneous pocket sym-
                                   metric with the normal ear, if present (Fig. 12.8-16). Stage one is accomplished once the rib cartilage has grown to
                                   sufficient size—usually, ~6–7 yr of age. Stage two requires transposition of the lobule 3 mo after stage one. Stage
                                   three is the elevation with skin graft of the framework from the head posteriorly. Stage four is the creation of a tragus
                                   and conchal excavation.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Recently, porous polyethylene implants have been used to avoid donor-site
                                   morbidity, and temporoparietal fascial flaps provide coverage to avoid alloplastic extrusion.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ear malformation; prominent ears; microtia; anotia

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine; table rotated either 90° or 180°; oral intubation

                                    Incision                 Posterior ear; occasionally anterior ear; microtia, stage-dependent; and chest wall

                                    Unique                   Head turned from side-to-side during operation.
                                      considerations

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 25 mg/kg (up to 1 g) iv preop

                                    Surgical time            2–4 h (depends on unilateral vs. bilateral); 1st stage microtia much longer

                                    Closing                  Ear dressing requires 5–10 min at end of procedure. Delicate vacuum test-tube drainage system
                                      considerations         in 1st stage microtia repair fixed to head dressing.

                                    EBL                      10–100 mL

                                    Postop care              PACU → room

                                    Mortality                Rare

                                    Morbidity                Protruding ears:
                                                                Hematoma formation: < 1%
                                                                Infection: < 1 %
                                                                Asymmetrical ear reduction: < 1%
                                                                Suture extrusion < 1%
                                                             Microtia:
                                                                Pneumothorax or hemothorax
                                                                Hematoma, infection, and skin loss: 1.6% (total)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                                Overgrowth: 41%

                                    Pain score               4

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                6+ yr

                                    Male:Female              2:1

                                    Incidence                Unknown

                                    Etiology                 Microtia: 9.2% bilateral; 32% left vs. 58% right; 4.9% recurrence within immediate family
                                                             Protrusion: Also seen among family members. Most are bilateral.

                                    Associated               Protruding ears: none known
                                      conditions             Microtia: Brachial arch deformities: bone/soft-tissue deficit, 36.5%; facial nerve weakness,
                                                             15.2%; cleft lip ± palate, 4.3%; macrostomia, 2.5%; urogenital defects, 4%; cardiovascular mal-
                                                             formations, 2.5%; other, 1.6%

===== PAGE 20 =====
Otoplasty      1465

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Ear Surgery, Chapter 3.0 Otolaryngology, p. 233.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bosenberg AT: Anesthesia for cleft lip and palate surgery. SAJAA 2007; 13(5):9–14.
                     2. Brent B: Ear reconstruction. In: Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen J-E, eds. Maxillofacial Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                        Edinburgh: 1999, 1419–28.
                     3. Brent B: Technical advances in ear reconstruction with autogenous rib cartilage grafts: personal experience with 1200 cases.
                        Plastic Reconstruct Surg J 1999; 104(2):319–38.
                     4. Breugem CC, Stewart KJ, Kon M: International trends in the treatment of microtia. J Caniofac Surg 2011; 22(4):1367–9.
                     5. Roberson JB Jr, Reinisch J, Colen TY, Lewin S: Atresia repair before microtia reconstruction: comparison of early with
                        standard surgical timing. Otol Neurotol 2009; 30(6):771–6.
                     6. Smith D, Abdullah SEFHJ, Moores A, Wynne DM: Post-operative respiratory distress following primary cleft palate repair.
                        Laryngol Otol 2013; 127:65–66.

                                                                                                                                                               Pediatric Surgery

===== PAGE 21 =====
c h a p t e r

                          12.9 Pediatric
                                        Transplantation

                                        surgeons
                                        Waldo Concepcion, MD
                                        Amy E. Gallo, MD

                                        anesthesiologists
                                        Julianne Mendoza, MD
                                        Louise Furukawa, MD
                                        Gregory B. Hammer, MD

===== PAGE 22 =====
Pediatric Renal Transplantation
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Renal transplantation is the therapy of choice for children with end-stage renal disease providing
                                   freedom from dialysis and improvement in growth. Preemptive transplantation is recommended when possible to
                                   minimize loss of growth potential and currently accounts for 25% of transplants. The source of the renal allograft may
                                   be a cadaveric (40%), living related, or living unrelated donor. More than 90% of donors are adults.
                                   A right curvilinear incision, starting at the pubic symphysis and extending to just below the ribs, is the approach
                                   most commonly used even for children as small as 10 kg. The donor renal artery and vein are anastomosed directly
                                   to the recipient aorta and vena cava, respectively. An adult-sized kidney may occupy the majority of the right upper
                                   quadrant in a small recipient. Meticulous attention to the positioning of the kidney will prevent kinking or twisting
                                   of the donor vasculature. This may require mobilization of the right lobe of the liver or even hepatectomy in some
                                   cases and almost always a right nephrectomy in small children. The donor kidney can be temporarily taken out of ice
                                   and placed into the recipient to determine the best site for the anastomoses. In this manner, the vessel length neces-
                                   sary to fashion straight, yet tension-free anastomoses can be determined. It is important to avoid redundancy in the
                                   vessels and ensure a straight line from the renal hilum to the aorta and vena cava without the hooking of one vessel
                                   over another. The venous anastomosis is fashioned first. The vena cava is clamped, and an appropriate size cavotomy
                                   is made. The renal vein is sutured to the vena cava in an end-to-side fashion. A small vascular bulldog clamp is then
                                   applied to the renal vein above the anastomosis to allow for removal of the vena caval clamp and reconstitution of
                                   lower extremity venous return to the heart. Heparin is administered, and the aorta is then cross-clamped proximal
                                   and distal to the aortotomy. An end-to-side anastomosis is fashioned between the renal artery and aorta, taking care
                                   to interrupt the front wall sutures and prevent the purse-string effect of a running suture. Warm ischemia can be
                                   minimized during this time by intermittently placing iced slush around the kidney. It is critically important to achieve
                                   substantial hypervolemia prior to reperfusion of the adult-sized kidney (ASK) because reperfusion will cause an im-
                                   mediate drain of a large portion of a child’s relatively small blood volume into the ASK. This necessitates bringing the
                                   central venous pressure to approximately 10–15 cm H2O before reperfusion with a combination of crystalloid and
                                   colloid to minimize tissue edema. As prophylaxis against ischemia-reperfusion injury, a single dose of iv mannitol is
                                   administered at the time of graft revascularization, and low-dose dopamine is also initiated. Adequate renal blood
                                   flow to an ASK cannot be obtained in children without maintenance of a hypervolemic state, and infants and small
                                   children are frequently kept intubated for 24 to 48 h postop to maintain control of their respiratory function while
                                   large volumes of fluid are administered.
                                   The type of ureteral reimplantation depends on the quality of the recipient bladder. An extravesicular ureteral re-
                                   implantation can be considered in a healthy bladder of adequate size. This requires distending the bladder with GU
                                   irrigant via a three-way Foley catheter. The bladder is reflected medially to accomplish the implantation near the
                                   postero lateral portion of the bladder with the ureteral orifice located close to the trigone. The detrusor muscle is di-
                                   vided, and a mucosal-to-mucosal anastomosis is fashioned between the bladder and the donor ureter over a ureteral
                                   stent. The detrusor muscle is reapproximated over the ureter for an adequate length to create an antireflux valve. If
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   the bladder is of small capacity or defunctionalized, a transvesicular approach to ureteral reimplantation is required.
                                   A bladder cystotomy is made at the dome, and the transplant ureter is brought into a shallow, mucosa-denuded, rect-
                                   angular trough extending from a superiorly placed ureteral hiatus distally to the trigone. The ureter is then spatulated
                                   and directly sutured to the urinary mucosa over a ureteral stent. The ureteral stent is sutured to a cystotomy tube
                                   brought out through a separate incision in the bladder for easy removal of the urethral catheter with its associated
                                   discomfort, while ensuring adequate drainage and prevention of clot obstruction. The cystotomy is then closed and
                                   the kidney inspected for perfusion and hemostasis.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine

                                    Incision                 Lower quadrant curvilinear

                            1468

===== PAGE 23 =====
Pediatric Renal Transplantation     1469

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                 Self-retaining retractor
                       instrumentation       Vascular instruments
                                             Foley catheter (three-way)

                     Unique                  Recipient hypervolemia (CVP 10–15 mm H2O)
                       considerations        Mannitol, Furosemide
                                             Dopamine
                                             Immunosuppression
                                             Potassium-free iv fluids

                     Antibiotics             Cephalosporin

                     Surgical time           3–5 h

                     EBL                     Minimal

                     Postop care             Maintain hypervolemia (CVP > 10 mm Hg)
                                             Maintain adequate SBP > 120 mm Hg with dopamine
                                             Maintain high UO with a combination of iv fluids + Lasix. Goal 150–200 cc/h
                                             ICU postop
                                             Transplant ultrasound postop

                     Mortality               < 2%

                     Morbidity               Primary nonfunction: 2.6%
                                             Vascular thrombosis: 10.3%
                                             Renal artery stenosis: 0.7%
                                             Other technical: 1.3%
                                             Bleeding: 2%
                                             Wound infection: 5%

                     Pain Score              7

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR KIDNEY
                        TRANSPLANTATION IN INFANTS AND CHILDREN
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for renal transplantation tend to fall into two groups: (a) children in the infant/toddler age group
                   who suffer from congenital syndromes (congenital nephrotic syndrome, severe polycystic kidney disease, obstruc-
                   tive uropathies, FSGS) or (b) the older child who may have a variety of conditions including severe autoimmune
                   nephropathies. These children are often the recipients of a living-related transplant, and as such, the surgery proceeds

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                    as a somewhat elective procedure. Most patients have been on a well-established regimen of peritoneal or hemodialysis.

                    Airway                   Some renal conditions may have associated syndromes and dysmorphia. A thorough air-
                                             way examination as well as perusal of old anesthetic records should reveal any potential
                                             airway problems.

                    Respiratory              Patients with autoimmune diseases (e.g., lupus) may have pulmonary involvement. Any
                                             patient presenting with signs and symptoms of URI should be allowed adequate time for
                                             resolution of heightened airway reactivity. Children born with large polycystic kidneys may
                                             have pulmonary hypoplasia.
                                             Tests: Pulmonary function tests, if indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular           Relatively long-standing hypertension and LVH can be seen in this patient population and
                                             may require bilateral nephrectomies prior to or during the transplantation. Adequate con-
                                             trol of hypertension should be achieved during the preoperative admission period.
                                             Tests: EKG, echocardiogram

===== PAGE 24 =====
1470   c h a p t e r 12.9   Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Gastrointestinal/      Patients with polycystic kidney disease may also have hepatic dysfunction and require
                                     hepatic              future liver transplantation. Patients with congenital nephrotic syndrome tend to be hypo-
                                                          albuminemic and may be on continuous albumin infusions.
                                                          Tests: Albumin, LFTs, PT, PTT if applicable

                                   Renal                  Most patients are well maintained on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. Other common
                                                          electrolyte abnormalities are metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and hypermagnesemia. Be
                                                          aware of current weight relative to dry weight as some patients may present with dehydra-
                                                          tion in the postdialysis period.
                                                          Tests: Serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine

                                   Hematologic            Anemia and platelet dysfunction are commonly seen.
                                                          Tests: CBC, platelet count

                                   Premedication          Most children will require a premedication to allay separation anxiety. Oral midazolam
                                                          0.5–0.75 mg/kg or iv midazolam 0.1 mg/kg (maximum 2 mg) is usually sufficient.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA.

                                   Induction              An inhalational induction with standard monitors will work well in patients without prior
                                                          iv access. Patients in the infant/toddler age group may have significant venous access prob-
                                                          lems, and the hemodialysis catheter (if present) may be used provided that sufficient hepa-
                                                          rinized blood has been aspirated from the dead space of the catheter lumen. Use of muscle
                                                          relaxation once iv access has been established is necessary for adequate surgical visualiza-
                                                          tion and mobilization. If recently dialyzed, pt may be hypovolemic. Induction of immu-
                                                          nosuppression begins in the preop period and continues intraop. Care should be taken
                                                          to discuss with the surgeon and nephrologist which immunosuppressive agents should
                                                          be given intraop. If thymoglobulin is used, a dedicated central line port is needed and
                                                          premedication with iv solumedrol (1 mg/kg), diphenhydramine (1 mg/kg), and acetamino-
                                                          phen (15 mg/kg) is initiated prior to infusion. Solumedrol (10 mg/kg) is given just prior to
                                                          unclamping of the renal artery upon reperfusion.

                                   Maintenance            Standard balanced anesthetic maintenance. Titration of a long-acting narcotic is recom-
                                                          mended, although high doses of meperidine should be avoided due to accumulation of
                                                          normeperidine. Adequate muscle relaxation is especially important in the patient under
                                                          20 kg to facilitate surgical exposure. Any coughing or straining can result in vascular
                                                          injury to the renal allograft. Significant hypothermia can be seen when the iced organ
                                                          is placed in the peritoneum. Tachycardia is frequently seen following reperfusion of the
                                                          ASK due to the relatively large vascular volume it can accommodate and the low vascu-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                          lar resistance. Urine output should be closely monitored postreperfusion.

                                   Emergence              Most children weighing < 20 kg remain intubated in anticipation of large fluid shifts due
                                                          to volume loading. Extubation in the operating room is usually feasible for patients larger
                                                          than 20 kg. All patients recover in the ICU for monitoring of hemodynamics and urine
                                                          output.

                                   Management of          Blood and fluids: Maintenance          Preop fluid status is variable. Maintenance fluids
                                     reperfusion          IV fluids without K+                   should be devoid of K+. Volume loading to a CVP
                                                          Volume loading                         of 15–20 or titrated to renal allograft turgor post-
                                                          Albumin loading                        reperfusion is usually requested by the surgeon
                                                                                                 for infants and small children receiving ASKs to
                                                                                                 avoid stasis and thrombosis within the allograft.
                                                                                                 Albumin boluses (10 mL/kg) or PRBC transfusion
                                                                                                 may be needed to achieve goal CVP. Dopamine

===== PAGE 25 =====
Pediatric Renal Transplantation      1471

                    Management of      Blood may be required                  (3–5 mcg/kg/min) is started to increase perfusion
                      reperfusion      Warm all fluids                        pressure to the allograft. In addition, epinephrine
                      (cont’d)         Promoting diuresis                     infusion may be needed to achieve systolic blood
                                                                              pressure of greater than 120 mm Hg necessary for
                                       Pressor support                        the ASK. For patients > 20 kg, the magnitude of vol-
                                                                              ume loading is decreased to a goal CVP of 10–15,
                                                                              which can usually be achieved with crystalloid and
                                                                              albumin alone. Constant communication with the
                                                                              surgical team regarding allograft turgor after reper-
                                                                              fusion will assist in guiding fluid management.
                                                                              Consider use of TEE in patients with hypertensive
                                                                              cardiomyopathy to guide volume loading to avoid
                                                                              pulmonary edema. Diuresis is promoted just prior
                                                                              to reperfusion of the renal artery with mannitol
                                                                              (0.5 mg/kg) and furosemide (1 mg/kg). Goal urine
                                                                              output after reperfusion is 5–10 mL/kg/h.

                    Monitoring         Standard Monitors (see p. D-1)         Adequate blood pressure to perfuse the ASK is
                                       Arterial line                          crucial as is sufficient preload (CVP 10–15) prior
                                       CVP (2–3 lumen)                        to reperfusion. Invasive arterial blood pressure
                                       Hct/electrolytes                       monitoring is necessary to monitor beat-to-beat
                                                                              variation in perfusion pressure and guide in titrat-
                                                                              ing volume and vasoactive infusions. CVP moni-
                                                                              toring is critical to management of volume status.
                                                                              Electrolyte derangements may occur during the
                                                                              case 2° large volume replacement with albumin or
                                       Urine output (Foley catheter)          blood products. ↓ Ca++ and ↑ K+ should be cor-
                                                                              rected. Hematocrit goal after reperfusion is above
                                                                              25% though caution should be taken with regard to
                                       PIP                                    transfusion to avoid renal artery thrombosis. Urine
                                                                              output is closely monitored after ureteral reimplan-
                                                                              tation. Peak inspiratory pressures should be closely
                                       Temperature control                    followed as risk of pulmonary edema is increased
                                                                              from volume loading. Care should be taken to avoid
                                                                              hypothermia that may occur following placement of
                                                                              iced allograft into abdominal cavity.

                    Complications      Ventilatory difficulties
                                       Electrolyte abnormalities
                                       Hypotension/inadequate renal
                                       perfusion

                                                                                                                                              Pediatric Surgery
                                       Low urine output

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications      Electrolyte abnormalities
                                       Ventilatory difficulties
                                       Inadequate pain control in the face
                                       of hypotension
                                       Hemorrhage
                                       Clot retention given small catheter size

                    Pain               Fentanyl 1 mcg/kg iv                   Care must be taken in the administration of iv opi-
                      management       Small doses of ketamine (e.g., 1–5     oids to prevent ↓ BP, which may compromise ASK
                                       mg iv) can be used for analgesia if    perfusion.
                                       patient is intubated

===== PAGE 26 =====
1472   c h a p t e r 12.9        Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Coupe N, O’Brien M, Gibson P, et al: Anesthesia for pediatric renal transplantation with and without epidural analgesia—a
                                        review of 7 years experience. Paediatr Anaesth 2005; 15(3):220–8.
                                     2. Fine RN, Ho M, Tejani A: The contribution of renal transplantation to final adult height: a report of the North American Renal
                                        Transplant Cooperative Study (NAPRTCS). Pediatr Nephrol 2001; 16:951–6.
                                     3. Giessing M, Muller D, Winkelmann B, et al: Kidney transplantation in children and adolescents. Transplant Proc 2007;
                                        39(7):2197–201.
                                     4. Salvatierra O Jr, Millan M, Concepcion M: Pediatric renal transplantation with considerations for successful outcomes. Semin
                                        Pediatr Surg 2006; 15(3):208–17.
                                     5. Salvatierra O, Tanney D, Mak R, et al: Pediatric renal transplantation and its challenges. Transplant Rev 1997; 11:51–69.
                                     6. Scott VL, Wahl KM, Soltys K, et al: Anesthesia for organ transplantation. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s
                                        Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 931–38.
                                     7. Shapiro R: Living donor kidney transplantation in pediatric recipients. Pediatr Transplant 2006; 10(7):844–50.
                                     8. Smith JM, Fine RN, McDonald RA: Current state of pediatric renal transplantation. Front Biosci 2008; 13:197–203.
                                     9. Smith JM, Stablein DM, Munoz R, et al: Contributions of the transplant registry: the 2006 annual report of the North
                                        American Pediatric Trials and Collaborative Studies (NAPRTCS). Pediatr Transpl 2007; 11(4):366–73.
                                    10. Stayer SA, Williams G, Andropoulos DB: Anesthesia for transplantation. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric
                                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford: 2012, 693–97.
                                    11. Uejima T: Anesthetic management of the pediatric patient undergoing solid organ transplantation. Anesthesiol Clin North
                                        Am 2004; 22(4):809–26.

                                   Pediatric Liver Transplantation
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Liver transplantation was first pioneered in the 1960s as a lifesaving experimental procedure for chil-
                                   dren with end-stage liver disease (ESLD). Since then, it has developed into the accepted treatment modality for pedi-
                                   atric patients with ESLD or fulminant hepatic failure. The indications for liver transplantation in children are broad
                                   and range from cholestatic cirrhosis secondary to biliary atresia to inborn errors of metabolism that, if untreated,
                                   result in devastating neurological injury.
                                   The current liver allocation system prioritizes pediatric recipients based on a calculated numerical value known as
                                   the Pediatric End-Stage Liver Disease (PELD) score. The PELD score was validated as a model for predicting the
                                   3-month wait-list mortality. Although exemption points can be petitioned for on a case-by-case basis, a p    atient’s
                                   degree of illness generally correlates with the PELD score. Absolute contraindications for liver transplantation
                                    include irreversible encephalopathy, uncontrollable infection, and untreatable extrahepatic malignancy. A general
                                     contraindication is poor quality of life postoperatively.
                                   The main constraint to pediatric liver transplantation compounding the preexisting organ shortage involves the
        Pediatric Surgery

                                   donor-to-recipient size ratio. The minimum acceptable graft-to-body weight ratio to provide adequate postop liver
                                   function is 1%. However, the suitability of a donor is more often determined by the maximum amount of donor liver
                                   that a recipient can accommodate in the abdominal cavity. This results in the utilization of several different types of
                                   grafts in pediatric liver transplantation.

                                       Type of Graft                           Artery             Portal Vein       Venous Outflow Biliary Reconstruction
                                       Cadaveric full size                    Celiac trunk          Main PV              Full VC               Main HD
                                       Cadaveric reduced size                 Celiac trunk          Main PV              Full VC               Main HD
                                       Cadaveric left lobe                    Common HA             Left PV              Left HV               Left HD
                                       Cadaveric left lateral segment         Common HA             Left PV              Left HV               Left HD
                                       Live donor left lateral segment        Left HA               Left PV              Left HV               Left HD

                                   Although the type of graft used determines certain technical aspects of the hepatectomy and implantation, the gen-
                                   eral sequence of events consists of:

===== PAGE 27 =====
Pediatric Liver Transplantation      1473

                        1. Recipient hepatectomy
                        2. Anhepatic phase (during which portal venous inflow and hepatic venous outflow are reconstituted)
                        3. Allograft reperfusion
                        4. Reconstitution of hepatic arterial inflow
                        5. Biliary reconstruction
                   A bilateral subcostal incision is used with a midline subxiphoid extension as needed. The abdomen is explored, and
                   adhesions are lysed taking care to suture-ligate varices in patients with portal hypertension. This portion of the pro-
                   cedure may be tedious and bloody in patients with prior liver surgery. The falciform ligament is divided down to the
                   suprahepatic vena cava. The left coronary ligament is divided, and the left lateral segment is mobilized from the dia-
                   phragm. The lesser omentum is divided and the lesser sac entered. The peritoneum of the hepatoduodenal ligament
                   is divided, and a hilar dissection is performed. The connective and vascular tissue of the hepatoduodenal ligament
                   is carefully divided taking care to suture-ligate any varices en masse until the common bile duct is identified. This
                   portion of the procedure may result in significant blood loss in patients with severe portal hypertension and coagu-
                   lopathy. The common bile duct is then suture-ligated and divided high in the hilum of the liver. The hepatic artery is
                   similarly identified, suture-ligated, and divided. The portal vein is then completely skeletonized. The right lobe of the
                   liver is mobilized from its retroperitoneal attachments to expose the lateral border of the vena cava. In the standard
                   technique the infra and suprahepatic vena cava are encircled taking care not to injure the right adrenal vein, right
                   renal vein, or inferior phrenic veins. The portal inflow is occluded with a vascular clamp followed by occlusion of the
                   infrahepatic and suprahepatic vena cava. At this point, the patient must have adequate circulatory volume to support
                   the interruption of subdiaphragmatic venous return to the heart without developing vasopressor refractory hypo-
                   tension. Although this degree of circulatory compromise is typically well tolerated by very young children and those
                   with chronic portal hypertension, venous congestion can result in troublesome intestinal edema and hemodynamic
                   compromise in metabolic patients or those with fulminant hepatic failure who lack alternative variceal pathways of
                   venous return. Consideration should be given to a temporary portacaval shunt in such cases. The recipient liver and
                   retrohepatic vena cava are excised, and donor liver implantation begins. In the piggyback technique, which is used
                   in the living donor operation, the liver is completely mobilized from the retrohepatic vena cava by individually ligat-
                   ing the short hepatic veins draining directly from the liver to the cava. The liver is excised with preservation of the
                   retrohepatic vena cava, and venous return can be restored prior to implantation by moving the vascular clamp to the
                   junction of the vena cava with the hepatic veins.
                   The goal of the surgical team during the anhepatic phase is to minimize the duration of caval disruption with its
                   associated intestinal edema and variceal congestion. The hepatic vein outflow is first reconstructed by fashioning
                    the suprahepatic caval anastomosis. In the piggyback technique, there is no infrahepatic caval anastomosis and an
                    end-to-end portal vein anastomosis is fashioned next. The liver is flushed with Custodiolâ solution (low K+, buffered
                   donor organ transplant solution) or albumin prior to reperfusion to minimize the risk of cardiac arrest 2° ↑ K+ and
                    ↓ pH. Venous outflow is then reestablished by removing the suprahepatic caval or hepatic venous clamp prior to
                    opening the portal venous anastomosis. In a standard procedure, the infrahepatic caval clamp is also removed. Re-
                    perfusion is the portion of the procedure associated with significant hemodynamic lability, as large volume shifts may
                    occur → pulmonary HTN and RV failure. Alternatively, the release of systemic inflammatory mediators may result
                    in vasodilatation and significant ↓ BP. The anesthesia team needs to be ready to pharmacologically intervene. Indis-

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                    criminate postreperfusion hypervolemia should be discouraged because CVP > 10 mm Hg can result in significant
                    liver congestion and dysfunction. Hemostasis is achieved prior to arterial reconstruction. Patients who receive cut
                    down or split livers performed ex vivo may have significant bleeding from the cut surface of the liver.
                   The donor hepatic artery is typically anastomosed in an end-to-end fashion to the recipient common hepatic artery.
                   In situations of large size discrepancy or poor recipient hepatic artery quality, an anastomosis may be fashioned
                   directly to supraceliac or infrarenal aorta. This requires aortic cross-clamping with its associated risk of ischemia/
                   reperfusion injury and renal failure. The surgical team should notice the immediate production of bile and resolution
                   of coagulopathy with clot formation in patients with a well-functioning graft. The biliary reconstruction can then be
                   performed in an end-to-end fashion if possible but frequently requires a Roux-en-Y reconstruction. If a Roux-en-Y is
                   performed, the bowel is divided distal to the ligament of Treitz, and the distal limb is brought up to the bile duct. In-
                   testinal continuity is restored with an end-to-side enteroenterostomy, and a hepaticojejunostomy is fashioned to the
                   Roux limb. Abdominal drains are typically left along the cut surface in split or cut down livers due to the increased
                   incidence of bile leaks.
                   Compared to adult liver transplant, metabolic disorders account for a larger number of pediatric transplants and
                   have some pre- and intraop considerations that are imperative to successful outcomes. Dual organ transplantation,
                   liver and kidney, are often necessary to prevent disease recurrence.

===== PAGE 10 =====
1474   c h a p t e r 12.9     Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Common metabolic disorders include:
                                       1. Methylmalonic Acidemia (MMA): severe uncontrollable lactic acidosis and metabolic decompensation dur-
                                          ing surgery. Both glucose and lactic acid levels should be monitored during surgery and consideration should
                                          be given to preop dialysis when MMA levels are high.
                                       2. Oxylosis: patients should receive pretransplant dialysis to remove oxylate from body tissues so that following
                                           liver transplant to correct the enzymatic defect, the kidney transplant will have an improved outcome.
                                       3. Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: a combination of preop plasmaphoresis and eculizumab (Soliris) is
                                          used to minimize postop recurrence.
                                   Posttransplant, the pediatric patient is then taken to the intensive care unit. In patients with end-to-end arterial
                                   anastomosis, the patient should be maintained in a hypervolemic state to ensure adequate hepatic perfusion in the
                                   immediate postop period. Keep hematocrit < 30% to decrease viscosity. Dextran and heparin are frequently used as
                                   adjuvants in the postreperfusion state to minimize the risk of hepatic artery thrombosis when a microvascular arte-
                                   rial anastomosis has been performed.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine with arms tucked

                                    Incision               Bilateral subcostal with midline subxiphoid extension as needed

                                    Special                Thompson liver retractor; Vascular instruments; Argon beam coagulator; Arterial and central
                                      instrumentation      venous access (above and below diaphragm); Foley catheter

                                    Unique                 Hypothermia requiring covering extremities with plastic to minimize convective heat loss, active
                                      considerations       rewarming
                                                           Encephalopathy requiring ICP monitoring
                                                           Hypoxemia secondary to hepatopulmonary syndrome
                                                           Hyperkalemic cardiac arrest on reperfusion
                                                           Air embolism on reperfusion
                                                           RV failure on reperfusion
                                                           Pressor refractory hypotension with vena caval disruption
                                                              DIC/fibrinolysis on reperfusion
                                                              Severe acidosis
                                                              Renal failure requiring intraoperative CVVH
                                                              Coagulopathy and hemorrhage requiring massive transfusion
                                                              Hypoglycemia

                                    Antibiotics            Zosyn (piperacillin + tazobactam) 80 mg of piperacillin component/kg/8h.

                                    Surgical time          4–6 h

                                    EBL                    300–1500 mL (1–5 U)
        Pediatric Surgery

                                    Postop care            Maintain infusion hypervolemia in end-to-end arterial reconstructions.
                                                           Heparin infusion, Dextran infusion, and aspirin for end-to-end arterial reconstructions
                                                           ICU postop
                                                           Monitor closely for signs of bleeding.
                                                           Monitor closely for acidosis or worsening coagulopathy suggestive of graft dysfunction
                                                           Transplant ultrasound postop.

                                    Mortality              2–5%

                                    Morbidity              Primary nonfunction: < 5%
                                                           Portal vein thrombosis: 2–5% early, 10% late
                                                           Hepatic artery thrombosis: 5–10%
                                                           Bile leak: 10–20%
                                                           Bleeding: 10%
                                                           Wound infection: 5%
                                                           Reoperation: 18%

                                    Pain score             10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Pediatric Liver Transplantation       1475

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               0–18 yr

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               500–600 transplants annually

                     Etiology                Biliary atresia 35–40%; TPN related 15%; metabolic diseases 10%; acute hepatic necrosis
                                             10–15%; hepatoblastoma 3%; autoimmune 3%; congenital hepatic fibrosis 2–3%

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Indications for liver transplant (LT) in children include (a) progressive subacute or chronic primary liver disease,
                   such as biliary atresia, (b) metabolic disease of the liver, (c) acute hepatic failure, (d) hepatic tumors, and (e) retrans-
                   plantation for hepatic graft failure. The most common disorder for which LT is performed in children is biliary
                   atresia, accounting for more than 50% of patients. It is the most common cause of chronic cholestasis in infants and
                   children. For the majority of these patients, a Kasai portoenterostomy is performed in early infancy. Even in those in-
                   fants in whom bile flow is achieved, however, progressive liver failure commonly ensues, resulting in cirrhosis, portal
                   HTN, and malnutrition. Complications include coagulopathy, esophageal varices, hypersplenism with splenomegaly
                   and thrombocytopenia, ascites, and growth failure. Recurrent cholangitis following the Kasai procedure may lead to
                   progressive hepatic injury and repeated hospitalizations for iv antibiotic therapy.

                   Children with metabolic liver disease represent the 2nd largest group of patients presenting for LT. Some metabolic
                   liver diseases include proximal urea cycle defects, and organic acidemias result in hyperammonemia that causes
                   neurological injury despite having intact hepatic synthetic function and no portal hypertension. In these patients, LT
                   has been shown to prevent further neurological deterioration resulting in a trend to transplant patients in infancy.
                   Care should be taken with these patients to avoid catabolic states or acidosis that may exacerbate neurologic injuries.
                   Coordination of care with the metabolic geneticists is critical to ensure that these patients receive the appropriate
                   intravenous glucose and lipid infusions in the perioperative period. Other metabolic liver diseases that result in
                   hepatic injury include, Wilson’s disease, glycogen storage diseases, and cystic fibrosis. In these patients, impaired
                   hepatic synthetic function and portal hypertension may be present.

                   Patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), primarily a disorder of complement regulation that is
                   characterized by a triad of mechanical non-immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, renal dysfunction, and thrombo-
                   cytopenia, may present for combined liver-kidney transplantation. Combined liver-kidney transplantation may be
                   performed in patients with documented mutations of proteins that are synthesized in the liver where hepatic trans-
                   plantation provides a possibility of cure. These patients are at high risk of graft thrombosis due to low complement
                   factor H levels. Consult nephrologists and surgeons regarding specific perioperative protocol that includes preop
                   plasma exchange transfusion via hemodialysis catheter to restore normal complement and regulatory factor levels,

                                                                                                                                                          Pediatric Surgery
                   intraop FFP infusion (20–40 mL/kg) prior to liver reperfusion, and postop anticoagulation.

                    Respiratory               Previous prolonged intubation may have caused subglottic stenosis. Ascites, pleural effu-
                                              sions, and hepatosplenomegaly cause a reduction in lung volumes in children with liver
                                              failure. Intrapulmonary R → L shunting through abnormally dilated pulmonary arteri-
                                              oles and impaired hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction may cause severe hypoxemia.
                                              Pulmo nary edema may result from hypoalbuminemia and iv fluid administration,
                                              impairing oxygenation as well as ventilation. Supplemental oxygen and, in advanced
                                              cases, mechanical ventilation may be required preop.
                                              Tests: CXR, ABG in hepatopulmonary syndrome

                    Circulatory               Chronic liver failure may be accompanied by a hyperdynamic circulatory state with
                                              ↓ SVR + ↑ CO. On the other hand, cardiomyopathy and/or pulmonary HTN may be present,
                                              and CO may actually be diminished. These changes appear to be less common in children
                                              than adults.
                                              Tests: ECHO

===== PAGE 12 =====
1476   c h a p t e r 12.9   Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Neurologic             Hepatic encephalopathy is a life-threatening complication of ESLD. Causes include accu-
                                                          mulation of toxins such as ammonia, GABA agonists, and other neuroactive substances.
                                                          Cerebral metabolism and the blood–brain barrier may also be abnormal in advanced liver
                                                          disease. The clinical manifestations of hepatic encephalopathy range from mild somno-
                                                          lence to coma.
                                                          Tests: Head CT to assess for bleed and cerebral edema. Acute liver failure may be associated
                                                          with severe cerebral edema and ↑ ICP, both of which are risk factors for severe posttrans-
                                                          plant brain injury. The pathophysiology of cerebral edema in acute liver failure is not well
                                                          understood though transplantation of a functioning hepatic graft has been shown to reverse
                                                          the edema. Monitoring of ICP, hypertonic saline, and CVVH to treat hyperammonemia do
                                                          not appear to improve outcomes in these patients.

                                   Hematologic            In addition to the coagulation problems secondary to poor hepatic synthetic function,
                                                          patients with ESLD may have anemia and thrombocytopenia. Anemia may arise from mal-
                                                          nutrition and bleeding. Thrombocytopenia may be a result of splenic sequestration. Both
                                                          conditions are worsened by dilutional effects from increased plasma volume.
                                                          Tests: CBC, PT/INR/PTT, fibrinogen

                                   Hepatic                Decreased concentrations of the vitamin K–dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X may
                                                          lead to severe bleeding. Deficiency of clotting factors may be caused by hepatic synthetic
                                                          dysfunction as well as malabsorption of vitamin K 2° ↓ bile salts in the gastrointestinal tract
                                                          or antibiotic therapy. Hypoalbuminemia contributes to low serum oncotic pressure, which
                                                          predisposes to intravascular hypovolemia, interstitial edema, ascites, and pleural effusions.
                                                          ESLD results in diminished hepatic drug clearance, reduced hepatic blood flow and hepatic
                                                          extraction ratio.
                                                          Tests: LFTs, albumin, bilirubin, PT/INR/PTT, fibrinogen, NH3

                                   GI                     Gastrointestinal variceal hemorrhage in patients with portal hypertension is common.
                                                          Aspiration of blood during an acute bleed can lead to pulmonary decompensation. Previ-
                                                          ous need for a Blakemore tube should be noted, and one should be available for intraopera-
                                                          tive use. Large protuberant abdomen usually warrants rapid sequence or modified rapid
                                                          sequence induction with rocuronium. Most patients are already on proton pump inhibi-
                                                          tors, and some will be on an octreotide drip. Octreotide (a somatostatin mimic) is incom-
                                                          patible with most TPN solutions and usually requires a separate iv for infusion.

                                   Renal                  Most children with relative long-term hepatic insufficiency coming to transplant have
                                                          chronically been on diuretic therapy for management of their ascites. This can result in
                                                          severe alteration of electrolytes. Hepatorenal syndrome requiring hemodialysis or CVVH
                                                          is not uncommon in acute hepatic failure. Preop discussion MUST occur with the nephrol-
                                                          ogy team as to the feasibility of intraop CVVH or an intraop dialysis run. For small children
                                                          with limited vascular access, the dialysis catheter may be needed for fluid resuscitation
                                                          purposes. Communicate with the blood bank to request both washed units of blood (which
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                          take about 1 h to prepare) or freshest units of RBCs. Correction of metabolic acidosis while
                                                          on dialysis is also preferred.
                                                          Tests: Serum electrolytes, BUN, Cr

                                   Metabolic              Many children with liver failure have severely impaired glycogen metabolism. Preop
                                                          dextrose infusion (TPN) must be continued intraop. Either the TPN solution or a D25
                                                          mixture run at equivalent grams of dextrose per h can be used. Preop consultation with the
                                                          geneticist is invaluable in the management of complex metabolic disorders.
                                                          Tests: Serum glucose

                                   Premedication          IV midazolam is usually required to facilitate separation from parents. Ketamine 0.5–1 mg/
                                                          kg iv is also effective in those children with paradoxical reactions to benzodiazepines.

                                   Preop prep             Preparation of the room, including medications and iv fluids, may take 1 h. Underbody
                                                          forced air warmer and water circulating blanket should be used because the patient
                                                          is prepped from sternum to pubis. The following infusions are routinely prepared:
                                                          dextrose-containing carrier, epinephrine, dopamine, and calcium chloride. Rocuronium and

===== PAGE 13 =====
Pediatric Liver Transplantation        1477

                    Preop prep            fentanyl infusions may be used. The following resuscitation medications must be readily
                      (cont’d)            available at a variety of concentrations; epinephrine, phenylephrine, ephedrine, and atro-
                                          pine. Drugs to treat hyperkalemia should be drawn up as unit doses, including sodium
                                          bicarbonate (1 mEq/kg), calcium chloride (10 mg/kg), dextrose (0.5 g/kg), and insulin
                                          (0.2 U/kg). A variety of cuffed ETTs should be ready. TEE, ultrasound to aid in vascular
                                          access, and rapid infusion systems should be available.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA with postop ventilation.

                    Induction             Following the placement of standard monitors (see p. D-1), a rapid sequence induction
                                          with rocuronium (1.2 mg/kg) should be considered in patients with large abdominal girth
                                          from ascites causing decreased lung volumes.

                    Maintenance           Standard maintenance (see p. D-3) with volatile agent, muscle relaxation, and fentanyl
                                          10–50 mcg/kg. During periods of instability when vapor concentrations may be low, iv
                                          ketamine 1 mg/kg can be used. Nitrous oxide is avoided to prevent bowel distention. PEEP
                                          is useful to prevent atelectasis exacerbated by surgical retraction of the diaphragm. Antibi-
                                          otics are dosed per surgical protocol. ABGs are drawn frequently to monitor electrolytes,
                                          acid-base status and aid in resuscitation.
                                          Establishment of vascular access can be very difficult and may take 1–2 h. Use of ultrasonic
                                          guidance can be helpful especially in the profoundly coagulopathic patient. Care should be
                                          taken to keep the patient warm during this period of vascular access. Major vascular access
                                          should be restricted to the SVC distribution because the IVC will be clamped. In cases of “piggy-
                                          back” transplantation, the caval clamp time is usually reduced, and if vascular access is severely
                                          limited, IVC distribution veins may be used. This should be discussed with the surgical team.

                    Preanhepatic          This phase of surgery begins with surgical incision and concludes when the hepatic/portal
                      phase               vessels are clamped. Opening of the abdomen and drainage of ascites will often improve
                                          ventilation though placement of retractors may compromise ventilation. Blood loss during
                                          mobilization of the liver may be copious in the presence of portal HTN or adhesions from
                                          previous surgeries. “Maintenance fluids” may include FFP and blood. Use of platelets and
                                          cryoprecipitate should be discussed with the surgical team as a hypercoagulable state is unde-
                                          sirable when the graft hepatic artery and/or portal vein are small. Hypercoagulability should
                                          also be avoided if venovenous bypass is planned (not commonly used in children < 30–40 kg).
                                          Large variations in BP and cardiac filling pressures are common during this phase of sur-
                                          gery due to manipulation and rotation of the liver, which may cause intermittent kinking
                                          of the vena cava. The anesthesiologist must be constantly aware of the progress of surgery
                                          and communicate any protracted periods of hypotension due to surgical manipulation.

                                                                                                                                                       Pediatric Surgery
                                          Transfusion of blood/products may result in hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypother-
                                          mia. All products need to be warmed. In patients weighing < 10 kg, the freshest available
                                          packed red blood cells should be used to minimize potassium load from transfused blood
                                          products. A calcium chloride infusion (10 mg/kg/h) can be used to maintain the serum
                                          ionized calcium > 1.0 and helps avoid BP changes associated with bolus administration of
                                          calcium. Hyperkalemia is treated with furosemide (1 mg/kg), correcting acidosis and infus-
                                          ing dextrose and insulin as required. Goals of this stage in preparation for the anhepatic
                                          phase include: (a) serum potassium < 4, (b) correction of metabolic acidosis,
                                          (c) ionized calcium > 1.0–1.2, (d) adequate urine output (0.5–1 mL/kg/h), (e) adequate
                                          blood pressure at the lowest CVP possible, (f ) hematocrit in the 30 range, and (g) euther-
                                          mia. Mild hyperthermia may help mitigate the hypothermia created by the iced donor
                                          liver during the anhepatic phase. Frequent arterial blood-gas sampling is necessary. Hourly
                                          sampling is a minimum, and extreme blood loss may necessitate sampling every 15 min.
                                          Blood loss and third space losses are considerable in this phase of surgery. Edema of
                                          internal organs and eventually the transplanted liver is undesirable. Closure of the small
                                          abdominal cavity with an edematous liver can cause pressure necrosis as well as abdominal
                                          compartment syndrome.

===== PAGE 14 =====
1478   c h a p t e r 12.9   Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Anhepatic phase        The anhepatic phase begins with clamping of the hepatic vessels and ends with reper-
                                                          fusion of the donor liver. Problems during this phase include fibrinolysis, acidosis, and
                                                          hypothermia. During the anhepatic phase, hydrocortisone (20 mg/kg) is given. Care
                                                          should be taken at this point to avoid hypoglycemia as it can lead to osmotic diuresis and
                                                          hemoconcentration.
                                                          Communication must exist between surgical and anesthetic teams regarding the amount
                                                          of bleeding present and which products should be used to treat it. Respiratory alkalosis
                                                          may be desirable to compensate for existing or projected metabolic acidosis. Correct any
                                                          metabolic acidosis with bicarbonate. Placement of the iced donor liver usually decreases
                                                          the core temperature by 1.5°C. This coupled with preexisting hypothermia can increase
                                                          coagulopathic bleeding.
                                                          The anhepatic phase can be as short as 15 min or longer than 1 h depending on surgical dif-
                                                          ficulty. In the case of short anhepatic times, the metabolic goals should have been achieved
                                                          in the preanhepatic phase.
                                                          Anticipation and preparation for reperfusion should be ongoing. A split liver transplant
                                                          usually entails more bleeding upon reperfusion, so the appropriate blood products must
                                                          be present in the room. Anticipation and preparation for reperfusion should be ongoing.
                                                          Reperfusion takes place after the portal vein and bicaval anastomoses are complete. In the
                                                          piggyback liver transplant, anhepatic time is reduced because only the hepatic vein(s) and
                                                          portal vein require anastomosis. Prior to tying the anastomotic suture, the liver is flushed
                                                          to remove any air from the vessels. A 10-min warning to unclamp is usually given to the
                                                          anesthesia team. Last-minute electrolyte corrections can be made. The patient is then
                                                          placed on 100% O2, low-dose epinephrine infusion (0.03–0.05 mcg/kg/min) and dopamine
                                                          (3–5 mcg/kg/min) may be started, and inhalational agent should be decreased or turned
                                                          off. IV midazolam or ketamine may be given to ensure amnesia.

                                   Postperfusion          This phase begins with slow unclamping of the portal vein and vena cava with reperfusion
                                     phase                of the donor liver. Unclamping may be associated with hemodynamic instability and even
                                                          cardiac arrest. Hypotension, tachycardia, dysrhythmias, hypothermia, severe acidosis,
                                                          coagulopathy and air- or thromboembolism can occur. During the unclamping the anes-
                                                          thesiologist must simultaneously watch the uniform reperfusion of the liver as well as the
                                                          blood pressure and ECG waveform. Increased T waves or widening of the QRS complex
                                                          should be assumed to represent hyperkalemia. IV fluids in the form of RBCs or albumin
                                                          should be ready in the event of anastomotic bleeding or bleeding from the cut edge of a split
                                                          liver graft. A small amount of epinephrine (1–2 mcg) bolus of calcium chloride (10 mg/kg)
                                                          and a bolous of sodium bicarbonate (1 mcg/kg) may help maintain hemodynamic stability
                                                          during unclamping of the portal vein and vena cava. When giving iv fluids watch the liver
                                                          for swelling. The hepatic artery anastomosis is then completed, prior to which the surgeon
                                                          may request that a dose of heparin (10 U/kg) be given.
                                                          Volatile agent can be restarted and the FiO2 can be reduced. Blood gas tensions and coagu-
        Pediatric Surgery

                                                          lation parameters should be checked 30 to 60 min after reperfusion to assess synthetic
                                                          function of liver allograft. Care should be taken to maintain the hematocrit between 25 and
                                                          30, because relative polycythemia may lead to hepatic artery thrombosis.
                                                          The biliary system will be constructed either with a duct-to-duct reconstruction or, in
                                                          cases of the small child or the patient with biliary atresia, with a Roux-en-Y choledocho-
                                                          jejunostomy. Patients with previous Kasai procedures will have an existing Roux limb, and
                                                          biliary reconstruction takes places quickly. Construction of a new Roux limb may take
                                                          1–2 h. During this time, it is important to keep up with third space losses and avoid hemo-
                                                          concentration while avoiding congestion of the liver. Vasopressors may be required to
                                                          maintain MAP goals, which should be set after discussion with the surgeons.

                                   Emergence              The patient is taken to the ICU intubated and usually paralyzed to facilitate ventilation.
                                                          Extubation is deferred to the ICU team.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Pediatric Liver Transplantation         1479

                    Blood and fluid    Massive blood loss expected.          IV access restricted to SVC distribution. Avoid hand
                       requirements    IV × 2 as large as tolerated based    veins for large-volume fluid administration because
                                       on age.                               infiltration is difficult to detect. Two arterial lines are
                                       Arterial line in radial and femoral   necessary because extreme vasoconstriction may
                                       2–3 lumen CVP line.                   dampen peripheral arterial line; femoral line inter-
                                                                             rupted if aortic clamping occurs. Avoid iv solutions
                                                                             containing lactate. Normosol preferred over NS due
                                                                             to lower sodium content. Administer blood based on
                                                                             hemodynamics and ABG because EBL is difficult to
                                                                             measure.
                                       Warm all fluids                       Fluids to have available: Normosol, or normal
                                                                             saline, PRBC, FFP, cryo and platelets; 5% albumin
                                       UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h                      Rapid infusion system if child is large

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors                     Five-lead EKG. Bladder temp if child is large enough.
                                       ETN2                                  Carefully insert nasopharyngeal temp probe.
                                       Arterial line × 2
                                       I-STAT                                I-STAT (bedside arterial blood gas sampling) system
                                       CVP                                   is useful.
                                       TEE                                   Take care during insertion of TEE due to varices.
                                                                             May be difficult to use because continuous orogas-
                                                                             tric decompression is needed.

                    Coagulation        PT PTT                                Preexisting coagulopathy is very common. Coagu-
                      management       Plt count                             lopathy may necessitate administration of products
                                       Fibrinogen                            during line placement. Discuss use of cryo and
                                       FSP                                   platelets with surgical team prior to administra-
                                                                             tion. Postreperfusion, treat clinical bleeding not lab
                                                                             values.

                    Positioning        Pad and protect lines                 Wrap all stopcocks near patient. Use gel headrest
                                       Pad pressure points                   to protect occiput. Check for pressure points due to
                                       ✓ Retraction devices                  surgical retraction devices.

                    Temperature        Warming blanket                       Underbody forced air warming. Hotline, Ranger, or
                                       Control fluid warmers                 rapid infusion system. The patient is wrapped with
                                       Wrap patient                          Webril and Saran wrap for warmth and to keep
                                                                             patient dry.

                    Complications      Coagulopathy
                                       Hemorrhage
                                       Air embolism

                                                                                                                                                   Pediatric Surgery
                                       Cardiac arrest
                                       Metabolic acidosis
                                       IV infiltration

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Monitoring         Serial LFTs                           Initial LFTs are quite high depending on level of
                                       PT, PTT                               preservation injury. Bile production and normal
                                       Lactate                               glucose level are good signs.
                                       Glucose
                                       Bilirubin

===== PAGE 16 =====
1480   c h a p t e r 12.9       Pediatric Transplantation

                                   Complications               Bleeding                                    Most care is deferred to the ICU team. Postop
                                                               Hepatic artery thrombosis                   vascular ultrasounds are followed. Hepatic artery
                                                               Portal vein thrombosis                      thrombosis is ominous, and patients are often
                                                               Biliary leak                                relisted for transplant if this complication occurs.
                                                               Primary graft nonfunction                    Hypertensive swings in the coagulopathic patient
                                                               Rejection                                    can lead to intracranial hemorrhage.
                                                               Infection
                                                               Intracranial bleed
                                                               Electrolyte abnormalities
                                                               Alkalosis
                                                               Renal failure

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Alonso EM, Besedovsky A, Emerick K, et al: General criteria for pediatric transplantation. In: Busuttil RW, Klintmalm GB,
                                        eds. Transplantation of the Liver, 2nd edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2005, 287–302.
                                     2. Campeau PM, Pivalizza PJ, Miller G, et al: Early orthopedia liver transplantation in urea cycle defects: follow up of a
                                        developmental outcome study. Molec Genetics Metaboli, 2010; 100:584–87.
                                     3. De Goyet JV, Rogiers X, Ott JB: Split-liver transplantation for the pediatric and adult recipient. In: Busuttil RW, Klintmalm
                                        GB, eds. Transplantation of the Liver, 2nd edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2005, 689–728.
                                     4. Esquivel CO: Current status and outcome of pediatric liver transplantation. Clin Liever Dis 1997; 1(2):397–415.
                                     5. Esquivel CO, Nakazato P, Cox K, et al: The impact of liver reductions in pediatric liver transplantation. Arch Surg 1991;
                                        126:1278–86.
                                     6. Farmer DG, Venick RS, McDiarmid SV, et al: Predictors of outcomes after pediatric liver transplantation: an analysis of more
                                        than 800 cases performed at a single institution. J Am Coll Surg 2007; 204:904–14.
                                     7. Hammer GB, Krane EJ: Anesthetic considerations for liver transplantation in children. Pediatr Anesth 2001; 1:3–18.
                                     8. Kerkar N, Emre S: Issues unique to pediatric liver transplantation. Clin Liver Dis 2007; 11(2):323–35.
                                     9. Loirat C, Fremeaux-Bacchi V: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Diseases 2011; 6–60.
                                    10. Saland JM, Ruggenenti P, Remuzzi G: Consensus study group: liver-kidney transplantation to cure atypical hemolytic uremic
                                        syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20:940–9.
                                    11. Scott VL, Wahl KM, Soltys K, et al: Anesthesia for organ transplantation. In: Davis PJ, Cladis FP, Motoyama EK, eds. Smith’s
                                        Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 8th edition. Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2011, 905–31.
                                    12. Stayer SA, Williams G, Andropoulos DB: Anesthesia for transplantation. In: Gregory GA, Andropoulos DB, eds. Pediatric
                                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. Wiley-Blackwell Pub, Oxford: 2012, 682–93.
                                    13. Tan WF, Steadman RH, Farmer DG, et al: Pretransplant neurological presentation and severe posttransplant brain injury in
                                        patients with acute liver failure. Transplantation 2012; 94(7):1–7.
                                    14. Vanatta JM, Esquivel CO: Status of liver transplantation in infants < 5 kg. Pediatr Transpl 2007; 11(1):5–9.
        Pediatric Surgery

