# 13_OUTOFOR
# Source: 13 OUTOFOR.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 13.0 Out-of-Operating-Room Procedures
# Pages: ?-?
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Procedures (p. ?)
- Radiofrequency Ablation Of Tumors (p. ?)
- Irreversible Electroporation (Ire Ablation) (p. ?)

===== PAGE ? =====
1481

          s e c t i o n

           13.0 OUT-OF-OPERATING
                                       ROOM PROCEDURES

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                          13.1 Out-of-Operating
                                        Room Procedures—
                                        Adult

                                        procedural specialists
                                        Charles DeBattista, MD (Electroconvulsive therapy)
                                        L. Bing Liem, DO (DC cardioversion, ICD)
                                        Michael P. Marks, MD (Interventional neuroradiology)
                                        Stephen T. Kee, MD (Tracheobronchial stenting, RFA, IRE)
                                        Daniel Y. Sze, MD, PhD (Image-guided procedures)
                                        Joan K. Frisoli, MD, PhD
                                        Eric J. Sirulnick, MD
                                        John Brock-Utne, MD, PhD
                                        Richard A. Jaffe, MD, PhD

===== PAGE ? =====
ANESTHESIA FOR OUT-OF-OPERATING ROOM
                                    PROCEDURES
                                    GENERAL COMMENTS
                                    Advances in the fields of radiology, cardiology, and neurology have led to an increase in the number of anesthesia
                                    procedures performed away from the OR. In line with these changes, the ASA has provided guidelines for the safe
                                    delivery of anesthesia at locations remote from the OR environment.
                                    Anesthetic considerations for out-of-OR locations (modified from ASA Guidelines1) include
                                         •    Primary and backup O2 sources (e.g., piped O2 + 1 full E cylinder)
                                         •   Adequate and reliable suction
                                         •   Adequate and reliable scavenging system (for inhalational anesthesia)
                                         •   Self-inflating hand resuscitator bag with ability to deliver at least 90% O2
                                         •   Adequate anesthetic drug supplies and equipment
                                         •   Adequate monitoring equipment to allow adherence to the “Standards of Basic Anesthetic Monitoring”2
                                         •   Sufficient electrical outlets connected to an emergency power supply
                                         •   Wet locations (e.g., cysto, arthroscopy, labor, and delivery) should be equipped with either an isolated elec-
                                              trical source or circuits with ground-fault interrupters.
                                         •    Adequate illumination for patient observation and monitoring equipment (flashlight backup)
                                         •    Sufficient space for expeditious access to patient, machine, and support equipment
                                         •    Emergency cart with defibrillator immediately available
                                         •    Immediate access to skilled anesthesia support personnel

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. American Society of Anesthesiologists: Guidelines for Non-Operating Room Anesthetizing Locations. American Society of
                                         Anesthesiologists, Park Ridge: 2008.
                                      2. American Society of Anesthesiologists: Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring. American Society of Anesthesiologists,
                                         Park Ridge: 2011.
                                      3. Eichhorn V, Henzler D, Murphy MF: Standardizing care and monitoring for anesthesia or procedural sedation delivered
                                         outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2010; 23(4):494–9.
                                      4. Metzner J, Domino KB: Risks of anesthesia or sedation outside the operating room: the role of the anesthesia care provider.
                                         Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2010; 23(4):523–31.

                                    Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)

                                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    Description: Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is the transcutaneous application of small electrical stimuli to the
           Procedures

                                    brain to produce generalized seizures for the treatment of selected psychiatric disorders, such as severe depression.
                                    There are several important aspects of ECT that are of relevance to the anesthesiologist. The first is the uncontrolled
                                    motor activity associated with generalized seizures. Prior to introduction of GA, the most common injuries associ-
                                    ated with ECT were compression fractures of the vertebral bodies and broken limbs from violent tonic-clonic motor
                                    activity. Even with complete paralysis, the masseter muscles are directly stimulated to contract during seizure induc-
                                    tion. As a result, the most common injury currently associated with ECT is broken teeth.
                                    A second consequence of ECT induction is that the electrical stimulus can cause contraction of cranial musculature
                                    and a brief dilation of meningeal blood vessels, resulting in postictal headaches in up to 40% of patients. Patients
                                    < 50 yr and those with a Hx of migraine headaches appear most at risk for post-ECT headaches that may occasion-
                                    ally require aggressive pain management. Finally, ECT may be a significant hemodynamic stressor. Initially, central
                                    parasympathetic centers are activated, resulting in bradydysrhythmias in ~30% of patients. Brief sinus pauses are not
                                    uncommon. The initial parasympathetic effects are followed by sympathetically mediated increases in HR and BP up

                             1484

===== PAGE ? =====
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)         1485

                   to 20–30% above baseline. Mean arterial blood pressure has been known to double in some instances. These cardio-
                   vascular responses can persist for minutes to an hour or more after the procedure is completed.
                   The optimal position for ECT is supine. Occasionally, the head is kept slightly raised to help maintain an adequate
                   airway and decrease anxiety. Patients typically come to ECT quite anxious about the procedure. ECT is generally
                   performed in a PACU or specialized ECT suite. In many centers, outpatients make up the majority of patients seen
                   for ECT. The electrical stimulus is applied through plastic adhesive leads prepared with a contact gel. These leads are
                   usually applied to the forehead in a bitemporal or right unilateral placement. Monitoring typically includes a two-
                   lead electroencephalogram (EEG) and frequently an electromyogram (EMG) to measure motor activity. A BP cuff
                   is inflated to act as a tourniquet and prevent neuromuscular blockade in the distal limb. Thus, an arm or leg can be
                   used to measure motor duration of the seizure. A special ECT device is used to generate the appropriate electrical
                   stimulus. Seizures are typically 30–90 sec in duration, and the entire procedure—from the induction of anesthesia to
                   patient awakening—is generally < 15 min. The recovery period averages 45–90 min and allows for monitoring of vital
                   signs, as well as the opportunity for the postictal confusion to clear. Patients can wake up mildly confused-to-frankly
                   delirious and require close nursing supervision. Postictal agitation is also quite common and may require an inter-
                   vention. Treatments are typically performed every other day, and the average number of treatments is 6–12 in the
                   acute management of major depression. However, ECT treatments currently tend to be tapered rather than stopped
                   abruptly. Thus, the frequency of treatments may go from 3/wk for acute treatment, to 1/wk, 2/mo, and finally 1/mo.
                   Maintenance ECT with a frequency ranging from every few weeks to every few months is commonly prescribed for
                   those patients who respond to ECT but fail to benefit from pharmacotherapy.
                    The most common morbidities associated with ECT include headaches and myalgias. Postictal confusion is the rule,
                    and some anterograde and retrograde memory loss occurs in most patients who have completed an acute course of
                    ECT. Memory loss is typically confined to the period immediately before, during, and immediately after an acute
                    series of ECT. There tends to be a cumulative memory loss with subsequent ECT treatments within a given series.
                    In most patients, memory deficits largely subside in the first 1–3 mo following an acute series of treatments. In rare
                    instances, autobiographical memory loss has been reported for months or years after an ECT series has been com-
                    pleted. Long-term memory loss appears to be more common with bilateral lead placement. In addition, ECT-related
                    mortality is estimated at approximately 4/10,000. Cardiac events account for 67% of all ECT-related deaths, with malig-
                    nant arrhythmias and MIs accounting for most fatalities. Pulmonary events (obstruction, pulmonary edema, or emboli)
                   account for most additional mortality. Cerebrovascular infarctions or hemorrhages have rarely been reported with ECT.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Depression; mania; catatonia; refractory psychosis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               None

                     Special                Seizure generator & electrodes; EEG/EMG monitors
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Requires muscle relaxation to prevent injury. 50–80 mg of succinylcholine is usually sufficient. Using
                       considerations       larger dose of succinylcholine can lead to patient waking up while paralyzed. Nondisposable bite
                                            blocks are required to prevent dental injury. Apply tourniquet (BP cuff) to one arm before administra-
                                            tion of muscle relaxant. A slow heart rate preop may require atropine. A high BP preop may require
                                            aggressive hypotensive Rx with beta-blockers, phentolamine, hydralazine, etc. If the seizure duration            Out-of-Operating Room
                                            is not > 25 sec, then another seizure may be ordered. Give more induction agents as needed.
                                                                                                                                                                   Procedures

                                            Because one arm is not paralyzed, asking the patient to squeeze your fingers will tell you that she/he
                                            is awake.

                     Antibiotics            None

                     Procedure time         Setup: 5–10 min
                                            Treatment: < 10 min (seizure duration 25–280 sec)

                     Postop care            PACU → room or home

                     Mortality              4/10,000

                     Morbidity              HA/myalgias/nausea: Common
                                            Confusion/memory loss: Common. Be aware that postoperative hypoxia can present with confusion.

===== PAGE ? =====
1486   c h a p t e r 13.1          Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity (cont'd)            Cardiac dysrhythmias: 10–40% (brief asystole common). Keep a close eye on the EKG.
                                                                   MI: Rare
                                                                   Pulmonary edema from excessive iv fluids: not uncommon.
                                                                   Pulmonary aspiration and/or negative pressure pulmonary edema: Rare
                                                                   CVA: Rare

                                     Pain score                    2–3 (HA)

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                     ≥ 18 yr. ECT is rarely performed in adolescents and preadolescents; however, patients in their 90s are
                                                                   sometimes candidates for ECT. There is a preponderance of geriatric patients on many ECT services.

                                     Male:Female                   1:2

                                     Incidence                     The lifetime prevalence of major depression (the primary indication for ECT) is ~17%; 26% of
                                                                   women and 12% of men are affected. < 1% of patients with major depression undergo ECT, and
                                                                   approximately 400,000 ECT procedures are performed in North America annually.

                                     Associated                    Substance abuse (30% of all depressed patients meet criteria for alcohol or drug abuse); panic
                                       conditions                  attacks (30% of depressed patients); psychotic symptoms (14% of patients); HTN and sinus
                                                                   tachycardia; dehydration; self-inflicted trauma; pregnancy.

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                         PREOPERATIVE
                                    Patients presenting for ECT usually have failed to respond to antidepressants; however, most will continue to take
                                    psychotherapeutic agents. Many of the older patients will be taking other medications for coexisting medical condi-
                                    tions. Drug interactions are an important consideration for the anesthesiologist (see Drug Interactions, p. F-1). The
                                    most commonly used medications are listed in Table 13.1-1.
                                    Anesthesia for ECT may seem to be a benign procedure; however, these cases—which seldom take > 20 min—
                                    can prove very challenging, especially in the geriatric population. ECT can place significant stress on the car-
                                    diovascular system; therefore, particular care should be taken to evaluate and optimize the patient’s pretreat-
                                    ment cardiovascular status. ECT usually takes place in remote locations, so the anesthesiologist must ensure
                                    that the location is properly equipped and complies with ASA Guidelines for Out-of-OR Procedures (see p.
                                    1484) and Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring.

                                    Table 13.1-1. Commonly Used Medications in the Treatment of Depression
                                                                                                                                          SNRI and Other
                                    Tricyclic                      MAOI                               SSRI                                Antidepressants
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    Amitriptyline (Elavil,         Isocarboxazid (Marplan)            Fluoxetine (Prozac)                 Venlafaxine (Effexor)
                                      others)                      Phenelzine (Nardil)                Paroxetine (Paxil)                  Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
           Procedures

                                    Amoxapine (Asendin)            Tranylcypromine (Parnate)          Sertraline (Zoloft)                 Nefazodone (Serzone)
                                    Desipramine                    Transdermal selegiline (Emsam)     Fluvoxamine (Luvox)                 Mirtazapine (Remeron)
                                       (Norpramin)                                                    Citalopram (Celexa)                 Bupropion (Wellbutrin)
                                    Doxepin (Sinequan)       Lithium (Often used as an                Escitalopram (Lexapro)              Trazodone (Desyrel)
                                    Imipramine (Tofranil)    adjunctive agent/mood                                                        Atypical Antipsychotics
                                    Maprotiline (Ludiomil)   stabilizer in depression)                                                    (Used adjunctively)
                                    Nortriptyline (Pamelor)                                                                               Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
                                    Protriptyline (Vivactil)                                                                              Quetiapine (Seroquel)
                                    Trimipramine (Surmontil)                                                                              Aripiprazole (Abilify)
                                                                                                                                          Risperidone (Risperdal)
                                                                                                                                          Ziprasidone (Geodon)
                                    MAOI = Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
                                    SSRI = Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
                                    SNRI = Selective norepinephrine/serotonin reuptake inhibitor

===== PAGE ? =====
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)       1487

                    Respiratory        These patients will require airway management and PPV. Hence, preop assessment of the
                                       airway must focus on the ease of mask ventilation and the potential need for ET intubation
                                       (e.g., airway compromise or severe GERD).

                    Cardiovascular     A recent MI (< 3 mo) is a contraindication to ECT. Relative contraindications include
                                       aortic aneurysm, angina, CHF, and thrombophlebitis. The presence of dysrhythmias, a
                                       pacemaker, or ICD is not a contraindication for ECT. For the patient with a pacemaker, a
                                       means (e.g., a magnet) should be available to convert the pacemaker to an asynchronous
                                       mode. Patients on long-term anticoagulation therapy may require pre-ECT dose adjust-
                                       ment (target INR 1.5–2.5) or they should switch to heparin before each ECT session and
                                       return to their standard therapy post-ECT.
                                       Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Gastrointestinal   Patient should be npo. Patients with Sx of GERD should be pretreated with Na citrate (30
                                       mL po), ranitidine (50 mg iv), and metoclopramide (10 mg iv). ET intubation should be
                                       considered for all patients at risk for aspiration.

                    Neurological       ECT is relatively contraindicated in the presence of ↑ ICP, and recent CVA (< 3 mo), intra-
                                       cranial mass lesions, or recent intracranial surgery (< 3 mo).

                    Endocrine          Presence of a pheochromocytoma (Sx of which may be confused with a psychiatric disorder)
                                       is a contraindication to ECT. < 1% of hypertensive patients will have a pheochromocytoma.

                    Genetic            3 for family Hx of pseudocholinesterase deficiency. Mivacurium (0.15 mg/kg) is a suitable
                                       alternative to succinylcholine.
                                       Tests: Dibucaine number (normal ≥ 80) and serum cholinesterase level, if indicated from
                                       H&P.

                    Hepatic            Hepatotoxicity has been associated with use of MAOI.
                                       Tests: Consider LFTs for patients on chronic MAOI therapy.

                    Orthopaedic        In patients susceptible to bone fracture (e.g., severe osteoporosis, osteoporosis imperfec-
                                       ta), an increased succinylcholine dosage (1.5 mg/kg) is given to ensure profound muscle
                                       relaxation. Patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis may have unstable C-spine, and
                                       extreme care should be taken during positioning of head and neck.

                    Ophthalmologic     Retinal detachment is a relative contraindication to ECT. Succinylcholine should be avoid-
                                       ed in patients with glaucoma treated with cholinesterase-inhibitors (e.g., echothiophate).
                                       Mivacurium (0.15 mg/kg) is a suitable alternative.

                    Pregnancy          Pregnancy is not a contraindication for ECT (even in the third trimester). After the 4th
                                       mo, the need for full-stomach precautions requires rapid-sequence induction and ET
                                       intubation (see p. B-5). Left uterine displacement should be maintained during treatment.
                                       Monitor fetal heartbeat.

                    Psychiatric        Patients receiving tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) may have an exaggerated pressor
                      drugs            response to direct-acting sympathomimetic drugs, with the potential for tachycardia, dys-
                                       rhythmias, and hyperthermia. The response to indirect-acting sympathomimetic drugs                    Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                   Procedures

                                       (e.g., ephedrine) may be attenuated in these patients. TCAs also will increase the effects
                                       of anticholinergic drugs (e.g., glycopyrrolate, atropine). Patients receiving MAOIs will
                                       exhibit exaggerated responses to indirect-acting sympathomimetic drugs (e.g., ephed-
                                       rine). In addition, in these patients, succinylcholine metabolism is inhibited (↑ NMB),
                                       and meperidine is contraindicated (↑↑ BP, ↑ Sz, ↑↑ T). It is probably unnecessary to
                                       discontinue TCAs or MAOIs prior to ECT, as long as these interactions can be avoided.
                                       Lithium should be discontinued for at least 3 d prior to ECT to avoid delayed recovery
                                       and subsequent posttreatment agitation and confusion. Lithium also is associated with
                                       ↑ NMB (succinylcholine and pancuronium). SSRIs have been associated with prolonged
                                       ECT-induced seizure duration and adverse behavioral/neurological effects follow-
                                       ing haloperidol administration (use droperidol and metoclopramide with caution). No
                                       adverse interactions have been reported between anesthetic agents and SSRIs or SNRIs.

===== PAGE ? =====
1488   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication             Although usually not required, some patients may benefit from an antisialagogue (gly-
                                                              copyrrolate 0.2 mg iv). Patients with Hx of postop N/V will benefit from a prophylactic
                                                              antiemetic (e.g., ondansetron 4 mg iv). Patients with postseizure muscle pain and headache
                                                              may benefit from ketorolac (30 mg iv). Some patients will require 500–1,000 mg caffeine
                                                              iv, or po, to decrease seizure threshold. The iv caffeine effect should be manifest in 5 min.
                                                              However, po caffeine must be given 30–40 min in advance. Verapamil (not adenosine,
                                                              which is blocked by caffeine) should be available to control supraventricular tachycardia
                                                              (0.07–0.25 mg/kg over 2 min). Labetalol, hydralazine, esmolol, and diltiazem are alterna-
                                                              tive drugs for control of HR and BP.

                                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: A review of previous anesthetic records is very helpful in formulating the anesthetic plan
                                    and in anticipating physiological changes unique to each patient. Usually brief iv anesthesia (mask oxygenation
                                    and ventilation) with muscle relaxation (1–2 twitches) is required to prevent patient injury during seizures. Prior
                                    to induction, a tourniquet (BP cuff ) is applied to the non-iv arm and inflated to a pressure above systolic. This pre-
                                    vents neuromuscular blockade distal to the cuff and permits direct monitoring of seizure activity. Preop BP con-
                                    trol (e.g., labetalol 5–20 mg, diltiazem 10–20 mg iv, or esmolol 0.5–1 mg/kg iv in increments) is often necessary.

                                    Induction                 Preoxygenation should be attempted in all patients. In some patients who are intolerant of a
                                                              mask, a less-intrusive blow-by technique may be tried. Anesthesia is induced with propofol
                                                              (1–2 mg/kg), sodium methohexital (0.5–1 mg/kg), or etomidate (0.1–0.2 mg/kg). An induc-
                                                              tion dose of etomidate will block stress-induced cortisol production for up to 24 h. Propofol
                                                              (1–1.5 mg/kg) may be used, but may shorten seizure duration. TCAs and MAOIs can increase
                                                              sleep time. After tourniquet inflation, succinylcholine (0.8–1 mg/kg) is injected to induce pa-
                                                              ralysis. Hyperventilation is carried out to enhance seizure activity. A bite block is placed, and
                                                              then the patient is ready for ECT. In barbiturate-tolerant patients, remifentanil (1–3 mcg/kg)
                                                              has been used as a means of reducing the barbiturate dose, thereby permitting adequate seizure
                                                              duration. Patients receiving remifentanil need minimal postseizure BP control.

                                    Maintenance               Given the brevity of this procedure, maintenance of anesthesia is rarely a concern; however,
                                                              occasionally a second or third treatment may be necessary if the seizures are of inadequate
                                                              duration (< 25 sec) and quality. In this case, a subsequent dose (10–30 mg) of succinyl-
                                                              choline may be needed. Assisted ventilation is necessary until spontaneous ventilation
                                                              resumes. Of major concern during the seizure period is the hypertensive response. Some
                                                              patients may need to be treated prior to induction of anesthesia with either labetalol (5–20
                                                              mg iv) or esmolol (10 mg q 1 min) to control HR/BP. SNP (5–50 mcg/bolus iv) is useful
                                                              to control BP in refractory cases. Profound ↓ HR may occur in the immediate post-ECT
                                                              period requiring atropine or a chest thump.

                                    Emergence                 Patients should be awake within 5–10 min postseizure and often are disoriented. Small
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                              doses of midazolam (e.g., 0.25–0.5 mg iv) may help to control agitation, and blow-by O2 may
           Procedures

                                                              be less stimulating. ASA guidelines for postanesthesia care should be followed (see p. 1484).

                                    Blood and fluid           No blood loss
                                       requirements           IV: 20 ga × 1
                                                              NS/LR @ TKO

                                    Monitoring                Standard monitors          Seizure activity is usually monitored by a psychiatrist observing
                                                              (see p. B-1)               the tourniqueted limb and by measuring EMG and EEG activity.
                                                              Tourniquet                 (These monitors are usually an integral part of the ECT seizure
                                                              EEG                        generator.)
                                                              EMG

                                    Positioning               Supine

===== PAGE ? =====
Interventional Neuroradiology         1489

                    Complications              Dysrhythmias                 Brief periods of asystole and profound bradycardia are not
                                                                            uncommon (usually related to parasympathetic overactivity).
                                                                            Treatment is rarely necessary.
                                               Tachydysrhythmias            Responds well to esmolol (10–15 mg iv) or lidocaine (1 mg/kg
                                                                            iv), although treatment is usually unnecessary.
                                               ↑ BP                         ↑ BP readily responds to esmolol (10–30 mg) or labetalol (5–20
                                                                            mg). In refractory cases, 10–50 mcg of SNP may be necessary.
                                               Dental damage                Use of bite block is essential. Dental damage is not prevented by
                                               Pulmonary edema              muscle relaxation (direct electrical stimulation of facial and jaw
                                               Aspiration                   muscles).

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              HA, myalgias                               Rx: ketorolac 30 mg iv
                                               N/V                                        Rx: ondansetron 4 mg iv
                                               Disorientation                             Rx: midazolam 0.25–0.5 mg iv
                                               Memory impairment
                                               MI/ischemia
                                               Dysrhythmias
                                               Pulmonary edema/aspiration
                                               ↑ BP                                       Prolonged ↑ BP is unusual and may suggest the
                                                                                          need for further workup.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Allan CL, Ebmeier KP: The use of ECT and MST in treating depression. Int Rev Psychiatry 2011; 23(5):400–12.
                     2. Cohran M, DeBattista C, Schmiesing C, et al: Negative pressure pulmonary edema. A potential hazard in patients undergoing
                        ECT. J ECT 1999; 15:168–70.
                     3. DeBattista C, Cohran M, Barry JJ, et al: Fetal heart deceleration during ECT induced seizures: is it important? Acta Anaesth
                        Scand 2003; 47:101–3.
                     4. Deiner S, Frost EA: Electroconvulsive therapy and anesthesia. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2009; 47(2):81–92.
                     5. Kurup V, Ostroff R: When cardiac patients need ECT—challenges for the anesthesiologist. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2012;
                        50(2):128–40.
                     6. MacPherson RD, Loo CK: Cognitive impairment following electroconvulsive therapy- does the choice of anesthetic agent
                        make a difference? J ECT 2008; 24(1):52–6.
                     7. Mirzakhani H, Welch CA, Eikermann M, Nozari A: Neuromuscular blocking agents for electroconvulsive therapy: a
                        systematic review. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2012; 56(1):3–16.
                     8. Sharp RP, Welch EB: Takotsubo cardiomyopathy as a complication of electroconvulsive therapy. Ann Pharmacother 2011;
                        45(12):1559–65.
                     9. Smith D, Angst M, Brock-Utne JG, et al: Seizure duration with remifentanil/methohexital vs. methohexital in middle aged
                        patients undergoing ECT. Acta Anaesth Scand 2003; 47:1064–6.

                                                                                                                                                               Out-of-Operating Room

                   Interventional Neuroradiology
                                                                                                                                                                     Procedures

                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   The indications for endovascular therapy for the brain and spine have continued to grow with the technical strides
                   made in both devices and imaging. Endovascular therapy is now widely used in the treatment of intracranial aneu-
                   rysms, arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs), and tumors. It also is extensively used
                   in revascularization of the cerebral circulation in the setting of acute stroke or for the treatment of cerebrovascular
                   stenoses. Many of these procedures can be performed with the patient awake; however, GA or deep sedation often
                   is used to minimize patient movement during procedures that require careful catheter and device control for safe
                   operation. These procedures can be divided into three broad categories: (a) embolization, (b) aneurysm therapy, and
                   (c) cerebral revascularization.

===== PAGE ? =====
1490   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                         Embolization
                                    This therapy may be used for a variety of lesions, including AVMs in the brain; dural AVFs; vein of Galen malforma-
                                    tions; vascular neoplasms, such as meningiomas, hemangiomas, glomus tumors, and juvenile nasal angiofibromas;
                                    and for treatment of epistaxis.
                                    AVM embolization usually is performed as an adjunct to radiosurgery or microsurgery, although in selected cases,
                                    embolization may be the definitive treatment. Brain AVMs are generally parenchymal lesions with multiple feed-
                                    ing pial arteries and draining veins. The goal of embolization is to reduce the size and shunt burden presented by
                                    the AVM before either radiosurgery or microsurgical resection. Liquid embolic agents are preferred, with n-butyl
                                    cyanoacrylate (NBCA) and ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (EVOH) being the two materials currently used for
                                    the procedure. Embolization often is preceded by neurophysiologic testing, which may include the superselec-
                                    tive injection of a barbiturate into the portion of the intracranial circulation being considered for embolization.
                                    Some centers perform the procedure with the patient awake to allow for more thorough clinical testing prior to
                                    embolization, while others prefer the patient to have general anesthesia to minimize patient motion.
                                    Dural arteriovenous fistulas involve dural veins or sinuses and are most commonly located in the regions of
                                    the cavernous, transverse, and sigmoid sinuses. Because of their location, these malformations usually are sup-
                                    plied from meningeal arteries. A cavernous sinus fistula also may develop as a direct large-hole fistula between
                                    the internal carotid artery and the cavernous sinus. Patients may have a variety of symptoms depending on the
                                    location, size, and drainage pattern of the dural fistula. The embolization process for these dural-based lesions
                                    differs somewhat from the technique used for pial-based brain AVMs. Arterial embolization may be used, but
                                    venous embolization is often used to definitively occlude the fistula. Embolization of meningeal arteries may be
                                    preceded by clinical testing for cranial nerve deficits. This usually is accomplished with the superselective injection
                                    of lidocaine before embolization, and it is often preferred to have the patient awake for this procedure. If arterial
                                    embolization is utilized, a liquid embolic (NBCA or EVOH) is often utilized. Venous embolization is usually done
                                    with platinum coil occlusion.
                                     Vein of Galen malformations are congenital lesions that may present in infancy or early childhood. Present-
                                    ing symptoms include CHF, hydrocephalus, and neurodevelopmental delay. These lesions often require a staged
                                    approach to treatment and present a special challenge in the neonate or infant. In general, arterial embolization is
                                     performed as the initial endovascular approach, and a liquid embolic agent is used. In some cases, this may be aug-
                                     mented by a venous approach, with embolization using platinum coils.
                                    Tumor embolization usually is performed as an adjunct to the surgical resection of highly vascular tumors (e.g.,
                                    meningiomas, hemangiomas, hemangioblastomas, glomus tumors, and juvenile nasal angiofibromas). Generally,
                                    arterial embolization of meningeal supply vessels is done before surgery, using PVA or trisacryl gelatin microspheres.
                                    Physiologic testing with superselective injection of lidocaine often precedes embolization. When there is tumor en-
                                    casement of a major artery, the patient may also undergo balloon test occlusion followed by permanent occlusion to
                                    reduce the risk of intraoperative bleeding.

                                         Aneurysm therapy
                                    Endovascular therapy is the treatment of choice for many intracranial aneurysms, and it consists of either direct
                                    intraaneurysmal obliteration with detachable platinum coils or placement of a flow-diverting stent in the parent
                                    artery to produce thrombosis of the aneurysm. A randomized, controlled trial has shown better clinical outcome
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    for patients treated with aneurysm coiling than surgical clipping in the setting of acute subarachnoid hemorrhage.
           Procedures

                                    Narrow-necked aneurysms are usually treated with a microcatheter through which coils are introduced directly into
                                    the aneurysm. Wider-necked aneurysms are more difficult to treat using this technique because coils may prolapse
                                    into the parent artery. In this situation, coiling may be done with either balloon remodeling or the combined use of
                                    a stent. Balloon remodeling involves placing a balloon catheter in the parent artery over the ostium of the aneurysm.
                                    The balloon is intermittently inflated with each coil insertion to prevent coil prolapse into the parent vessel. Fenes-
                                    trated stents can also be introduced into the parent artery over the ostium of the aneurysm. The aneurysm is coiled
                                    by placing a microcatheter through the stent fenestrations into the aneurysm. Parent artery occlusion is still used
                                    for some giant or fusiform aneurysms, but has more recently been largely replaced by the use of flow-diverting
                                    stents (e.g., Pipeline™ ). Parent artery occlusion is generally done in a two-step process. Test occlusion is initially
                                    performed with a balloon-tipped catheter, and the patient is evaluated using clinical testing and neurophysiologi-
                                    cal monitoring. The testing may be done with controlled hypotension to improve the test sensitivity. If the patient

===== PAGE ? =====
Interventional Neuroradiology       1491

                                                                                        PipelineTM stent

                                                                     Guidewire

                                                                              Microcatheter

                               Figure 13.1-1. Example of a fine mesh, flow-diverting stent (Pipeline™) used to treat
                               a wide-neck aneurysm.

                   tolerates test occlusion, a permanent occlusion is usually done using coils placed into the parent artery. More recently,
                   flow diverter stents have been used to treat giant and wide-necked aneurysms (see Fig. 13.1-1). These stents are
                   constructed using fine mesh self-expanding metal. They are placed in the parent artery to reduce blood flow into
                   the aneurysm sac resulting in gradual thrombosis of the aneurysm while maintaining flow in the parent artery. This
                   treatment is generally reserved for unruptured aneurysms as the patients require treatment with antiplatelet agents.

                         Cerebral Revascularization
                   Acute stroke thrombolysis or thrombectomy is performed to recanalize larger occluded arteries in the cerebrovas-                    Out-of-Operating Room
                   cular circulation, including the internal carotid, middle cerebral, vertebral, and basilar arteries. Intravenous tissue
                                                                                                                                                             Procedures

                   plasminogen activator (IV-tPA) is used up to 4.5 h following acute stroke onset. Intraarterial thrombolytics and
                   thrombectomy devices are used when IV-tPA has failed to open the occluded artery or patients present beyond 4.5 h.
                   Physiologic imaging with either CT or MR is used at many centers to select patients who will benefit from treatment
                   in these more extended time windows. The FDA has recently approved a device for mechanical thrombectomy in the
                   setting of stroke. These devices include a suction thrombectomy catheter, which can be introduced into the intracra-
                   nial circulation, and retrievable stents, which are introduced into the thrombus and after entrapping the thrombus
                   are pulled from the circulation. In addition, many endovascular therapists employ intraarterial thrombolytics either
                   alone or combined with a mechanical thrombectomy device.
                   Angioplasty and stent placement for symptomatic atherosclerotic stenosis in the cerebrovascular circulation are
                   becoming more widely performed in lieu of medical or direct surgical therapy. Stents with distal protection devices

===== PAGE ? =====
1492   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    have now been approved for the treatment of cervical carotid artery stenosis. Distal protection devices (e.g., b   alloon
                                    or basket devices) have been shown to reduce the thromboembolic complication rate and are now required for
                                    treatment in most cases. A recent large multicenter trial of both symptomatic and asymptomatic carotid steno-
                                    sis patients found the composite risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, or death did not differ significantly between
                                    stented patients and those undergoing endarterectomy. Arterial stenosis located more distally and intracranial
                                     lesions either are treated with angioplasty alone or are stented following angioplasty. There are no efficacy data avail-
                                    able for these more distal lesions, and a recent trial of stenting versus medical therapy for intracranial stenosis found
                                    that medical therapy had lower 12-mo rates of stroke and death.
                                    Vasospasm often accompanies subarachnoid hemorrhage and results in ischemic complications, which are a com-
                                    mon cause of morbidity and mortality following aneurysmal rupture. The endovascular therapist is often asked to
                                    treat this problem with either drugs or balloons. Direct administration of intraarterial vasodilators, such as vera-
                                    pamil, nimodipine, and nicardipine, has been used particularly for treatment of more distal spasm. More proximal
                                    spasm involving the arteries of the circle of Willis is often treated using high-compliance angioplasty balloons.

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Embolization                              Aneurysm Therapy          Cerebral Revascularization

                                     Position                 Supine                                    ⇐                         ⇐

                                     Incision                 Femoral artery, catheterization           ⇐                         ⇐
                                                              (may utilize brachial or radial artery)

                                     Unique considerations BP control; AVM; anticoagulation;            BP control; ± EP moni-    ⇐
                                                           EP monitoring                                toring; anticoagulation

                                     Antibiotics              Usually none; occasionally used           ⇐                         ⇐
                                                              with closure device

                                     Procedure time           2–5 h                                     2–4 h                     ⇐

                                     Closing                  Femoral artery compression or             ⇐                         ⇐
                                       considerations         closure device

                                     EBL                      Minimal                                   ⇐                         ⇐

                                     Postop care              Ward or ICU × 24–48 h                     ICU                       Ward or ICU

                                     Mortality                1–2% (vascular lesions)                   ⇐                         ⇐

                                     Morbidity                Overall: ~5%                              ⇐                         ⇐
                                                              Thromboembolic stroke                     ⇐                         ⇐
                                                              Hemorrhage (AVM, AVF)                     SAH                       Vessel rupture/dissection

                                     Pain score               1–2                                       1–2                       1–2

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                     Age range                      Neonatal–elderly
           Procedures

                                     Male:Female                    1:1

                                     Etiology                       Congenital; acquired (traumatic, infectious, degenerative, etc.)

                                     Associated conditions          SAH ± vasospasm; ↑ ICP; HTN/CAD/PVD; blood dyscrasia

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                         PREOPERATIVE
                                    Patients presenting for diagnostic neuroradiologic procedures frequently may require only local anesthesia and seda-
                                    tion. The newer nontoxic and low osmolality contrast agents have improved patient comfort and tolerance of these

===== PAGE ? =====
Interventional Neuroradiology       1493

                   procedures while minimizing adverse reactions. Patients presenting for therapeutic neuroradiological procedures
                   may be restless and are likely to experience some discomfort and, therefore, may require GA to tolerate these often
                   lengthy procedures. The advantages of GA, however, must be balanced against the potential need for intraop neu-
                   rological monitoring (e.g., speech, vision, and mental status) that requires the patient to be awake and cooperative.
                   In this set of circumstances, close consultation between the neuroradiologist and anesthesiologist is required in
                   formulating the anesthesia plan. In many cases, time is of the essence, and even short delays may reduce favorable
                   outcome.

                    Respiratory              Access to the airway may be limited; therefore, examination should focus on the need
                                             for elective ET intubation. Patients with chronic cough may require GA to ensure
                                             immobility.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular          Patients with recent intracranial hemorrhage may demonstrate ECG abnormalities (PVCs
                                            in 30–80%; ST-T wave changes in > 50%), which need to be differentiated from new isch-
                                            emic heart disease (ECHO, cardiac enzymes).
                                            Tests: ECG; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Neurological             Symptoms vary with the location, size, and type of lesion. Aneurysms seldom produce
                                             neurological symptoms unless they leak or rupture, whereas tumors are commonly associ-
                                             ated with symptoms of ↑ ICP (HA, N/V, altered mental status, papilledema). Patients with
                                             recent cerebral hemorrhages are likely to be medicated with calcium channel blockers
                                             (e.g., nimodipine, nicardipine) to ↓ arterial vasospasm. Patients with ↑ ICP or cranial
                                             trauma usually will need GA with intubation and mechanical ventilation.

                    Premedication           Preop sedation may mask the Sx of ↑ ICP or intracranial hemorrhage. Patients at high
                                            risk for contrast-media reactions (e.g., patients with previous contrast reaction, allergy to
                                            iodine or seafood) should receive prophylactic treatment consisting of prednisone, 50 mg
                                            po q 6 h × 3, starting 18 h before the study, and diphenhydramine, 50 mg po/im, 1 h before
                                            the procedure.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: MAC (see p. B-3) may be adequate for patients undergoing diagnostic procedures and nec-
                   essary for patients requiring neurological assessment during more invasive procedures; otherwise, use GETA or be
                   prepared to rapidly convert to GETA during the procedure. Although several reports suggest that patients receiv-
                   ing GETA for neurointerventional procedures have worse outcomes compared to those receiving sedation, these
                   observations are not based on randomized controlled studies and are inherently biased because the patients most
                   likely to receive only sedation are also the most likely to be stable and uncomplicated at the time of the procedure.

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2). Patients with ↑ ICP should be hyperventilated to an ETCO2
                                             of ~30 mm Hg. In patients with vascular lesions that may leak or rupture, BP responses to
                                             laryngoscopy and intubation should be blunted (e.g., remifentanil: 3–5 mcg/kg iv 1–2 min
                                             in advance).
                                            Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation is usually mandatory to control ven-               Out-of-Operating Room
                    Maintenance
                                                                                                                                                          Procedures

                                            tilation and minimize the chance of movement. Maintain normocapnia, although hyper-
                                            ventilation may be necessary to ↓ ICP and may also enhance the quality of the angiogram.
                                            Heparin (ACT goal: 250–350 sec) may be requested. Protamine should be immediately
                                            available.

                    Emergence               Prompt awakening is important to permit neurologic evaluation. Ondansetron (4 mg iv) is
                                            useful to ↓ postop N/V. Extubate when airway reflexes have returned. Continuous control
                                            of BP may be necessary during emergence phase. Patients typically are transported to ICU
                                            immediately following the procedure.

                    Blood and fluid         IV: 18 ga × 1–2                       Avoid glucose-containing solutions unless the patient
                       requirements         NS @ 3–5 mL/kg/h                      is hypoglycemic (< 70 mg/dL)

===== PAGE ? =====
1494   c h a p t e r 13.1   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).   BP can be monitored from femoral line placed by
                                                           Arterial line                     radiologist. However, another arterial line often will
                                                           Urinary catheter                  be necessary for postop monitoring in the ICU. Place
                                                           ± EPs                             urinary catheter if procedure is lengthy (> 3 h).
                                                                                             Keep isoflurane or sevoflurane < 0.5 MAC and N2O
                                                                                             < 50% to minimize interference with EP monitor-
                                                                                             ing. Supplement with remifentanil infusion, if nec-
                                                                                             essary. TIVA may be requested in the erroneous
                                                                                             belief that motor or sensory EPs cannot be obtained
                                                                                             while using inhalational agents.
                                                           Glucose                           Keep serum glucose 70–140 mg/dL. Use insulin in-
                                                                                             fusion to control hyperglycemia.

                                    Control of BP          SNP (0.2–2 mcg/kg/min)            BP control may be necessary during intracranial cath-
                                                           Maintain normovolemia.            eter manipulation, embolization, and postemboliza-
                                                           Esmolol (50–200 mcg/kg/min)       tion. Close communication with the radiologist is
                                                                                             important. In patient with acute ischemic stroke or in-
                                                                                             tracranial hemorrhage, keep SBP between 140 and 220
                                                                                             mm Hg (140 and 180 mm Hg after iv tPA). SNP/es-
                                                                                             molol may be infused through a second peripheral iv.

                                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points         X-ray table may not be well padded → nerve
                                                           3 eyes                            damage.

                                    Complications,         Common reactions:                 These reactions occur in > 5% of patients and may
                                      contrast               N/V                             require no treatment apart from reassurance or a
                                      related                Itching                         mild anxiolytic. Mild allergic reactions may be treat-
                                                             Urticaria                       ed with diphenhydramine 25–50 mg iv. Monitor
                                                             Sensation of warmth             patients for progression of Sx → need for more
                                                             Pain                            aggressive therapy.
                                                             Anxiety
                                                             Rash
                                                           Neurotoxic Sx:
                                                             Hemiplegia                      These reactions may be related to the hyperosmolari-
                                                             Blindness                       ty of the agent. If persistent, procedure should be ter-
                                                             Aphasia                         minated. Rx may require steroids and vasopressors to
                                                             ↓ consciousness                 improve perfusion. In the anesthetized patient, these
                                                           Major allergic reactions:         Sx will be masked.
                                                             Bronchospasm                    Epinephrine (0.25–0.5 mg iv) should be given
                                                             ↓ BP                            immediately. Rx of anaphylaxis includes: eliminate
                                                             Cardiac arrest                   antigens (e.g., contrast agent, latex); secure airway;
                                                             Pulmonary edema                  administer 100% O2, iv fluids, epinephrine, and
                                                             Laryngeal edema                 diphenhydramine + ranitidine. Supplemental Rx
                                                             Dysrhythmias                    may include steroids (e.g., hydrocortisone 5 mg/kg),
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                                                             atropine, NaHCO3, vasopressin, and epinephrine
           Procedures

                                                                                             infusion.

                                    Complications,         Hemorrhage                        Reverse heparin (1 mg protamine/100 mg heparin).
                                      other                                                  Intracranial bleeding may require immediate trans-
                                                           Vasospasm                         port to OR for surgical repair.
                                                                                             Rx: vasodilators (e.g., NTG) or papaverine delivered
                                                           Occlusion of vessel               by catheter, or balloon angioplasty.
                                                                                             Deliberate hypertension may be beneficial. Rx: angio-
                                                                                             plasty. (Recanalization and stenting may be used for
                                                                                             thrombotic occlusions.)

===== PAGE ? =====
Direct Current (DC) Cardioversion           1495

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Neurologic deficits                         CT scan for evaluation, as prompt neurosurgical
                                                                                           intervention may be required.
                                               Vasospasm                                   May require Ca++ channel blocker (e.g., nimodip-
                                                                                           ine). Consult with neurosurgeon.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Blackburn SL, Ashley WW Jr, Rich KM, et al: Combined endovascular embolization and stereotactic radiosurgery in the
                        treatment of large arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 2011; 114:1758–67.
                     2. Brott TG, Hobson RW, Howard G, et al: Stenting versus endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery stenosis. NEJM 2010;
                        363:11–23.
                     3. Froehler MT, Fifi JT, Majid A, et al: Anesthesia for endovascular treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Neurology 2012; 79:
                        8167–73.
                     4. Gahremanpour A, Perin EC, Silva G: Carotid artery stenting versus endarterectomy: a systematic review. Tex Heart Inst J
                        2012; 39(4):474–87.
                     5. Gupta R, Vora NA, Horowitz MB, et al: Multimodal reperfusion therapy for acute ischemic stroke: factors predicting vessel
                        recanalization. Stroke 2006; 37:986–90.
                     6. Hartmann A, Mast H, Mohr JP, et al: Determinants of staged endovascular and surgical treatment outcome of brain
                        arteriovenous malformations. Stroke 2005; 36:2431–5.
                     7. Jayaraman MV, Marcellus ML, Hamilton S, et al: Neurologic complications of arteriovenous malformation embolization
                        using liquid embolic agents. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29:242–6.
                     8. Lakhani S, Guha A, Nahser HC: Anaesthesia for endovascular management of cerebral aneurysms. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2006;
                        23:902–13.
                     9. Lee CZ, Young WL: Anesthesia for endovascular neurosurgery and interventional neuroradiology. Anesthesiol Clin 2012;
                        30(2):127–47.
                    10. Leong S, Fanning NF: Persistent neurological deficit from iodinated contrast encephalopathy following intracranial aneurysm
                        coiling. A case report and review of the literature. Interv Neuroradiol 2012; 18(1):33–41.
                    11. Marks MP, Wojack JC, Al-Ali F, et al: Angioplasty for symptomatic intracranial stenosis. Stroke 2006; 37:1016–20.
                    12. Molyneux AJ, Kerr RSC, Ya LM, et al: International subarachnoid aneurysm trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clipping versus
                        endovascular coiling in 2143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms: a randomised comparison of effects on survival,
                        dependency, seizures, rebleeding, subgroups and aneurysm occlusion. Lancet 2005; 366:809–17.
                    13. Saatci I, Yanvuz K, Ozer C, et al: Treatment of intracranial aneurysms using the pipeline flow-diverter embolization device: a
                        single-center experience with long-term follow-up results. AJNR 2012; 33:1436–46.
                    14. Scharf J, Dempfle CE: Anticoagulation in neurointerventions: basic pharmacology and pathophysiology, current status,
                        practical advice. Clin Neuroradiol 2012; 22(1):3–13.
                    15. Smith WS: Safety of mechanical thrombectomy and intravenous tissue plasminogen activator in acute ischemic stroke:
                        results of the multi Mechanical Embolus Removal in Cerebral Ischemia (MERCI) trial, part 1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2006;
                        27:1177–82.
                    16. Smith WS, Sung G, Starkman S, et al: Safety and efficacy of mechanical embolectomy in acute ischemic stroke. Results of the
                        MERCI Trial. Stroke 2005; 36:1432–40.
                    17. Taqi MA, Vora N, Callison RC, Lin R, Wolfe TJ: Past, present, and future of endovascular stroke therapies. Neurology 2012;
                        79(13 Suppl 1):S213–20.

                                                                                                                                                                 Out-of-Operating Room
                   Direct Current (DC) Cardioversion
                                                                                                                                                                       Procedures

                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Direct current (DC) cardioversion is a treatment for cardiac arrhythmias that uses a brief, dosed
                   discharge of electricity across the heart. This biphasic waveform energy is more efficient, requiring 20–170 J, than
                   monophasic waveform, which requires 50–360 J. Effective depolarization of a critical mass of the heart terminates
                   the arrhythmia, allowing NSR to resume. The electrical shock is delivered across the chest wall, using two external
                   paddles placed in one of the standard positions (i.e., the anterior-posterior [A-P], basilar-apical, or apical-posterior).
                   The pulse is delivered synchronous to the QRS, thus avoiding the vulnerable period for inducing malignant tachyar-
                   rhythmias. Shock to treat ventricular fibrillation is applied emergently and asynchronously (thus, the term “defibrilla-
                   tion”). To avoid discomfort, cardioversion should always be performed with the patient under deep sedation or brief
                   GA. It is unacceptable to deliver this therapy to an awake patient.

===== PAGE ? =====
1496   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Atrial fibrillation (AF); atrial flutter; other supraventricular tachyarrhythmias; ventricular
                                    tachyarrhythmias

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                Supine with defibrillator pads positioned A-P, basilar-apical, or apical-posterior

                                     Unique                  Adequate anticoagulation (INR = 2–3) in patients with AF
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics             None

                                     Procedure time          ≤ 30 min

                                     Postop care             Monitoring of cardiac rhythm in treatment room

                                     Mortality               0.1%

                                     Morbidity               Skin burns: < 15% (1st degree); 2% (2nd degree); lesser incidence with biphasic waveform
                                                             Embolic event: 2% (↑ risk with mitral valve disease)
                                                             Acute pulmonary edema: 1%
                                                             More serious arrhythmia: 1%
                                                             Myocardial damage: Incidence unknown, but estimated to be very low—proportional to delivered
                                                             energy.

                                     Pain score              2–3

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range               All ages

                                     Male:Female             3:1

                                     Incidence               100,000/yr in the United States

                                     Etiology                Reentry substrates (e.g., atrial flutter and fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia) from hypertensive
                                                             heart disease, remote MI, cardiomyopathy; idiopathic

                                     Associated              LV dysfunction; CAD; cardiomyopathy; HTN; valvular disease; COPD; obesity; CVA; acute MI;
                                       conditions            pulmonary edema

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                         PREOPERATIVE
                                    In general, patients presenting for cardioversion fall into one of two categories: elective or emergent. The presence or
                                    absence of hemodynamic instability will define the category. In the emergency patient, full-stomach precautions may
                                    be necessary (see p. B-5). Elective cardioversions usually are carried out on patients who have failed drug therapy.
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    Respiratory               Preop evaluation of the airway should focus on the need for elective ET intubation (patients
           Procedures

                                                              with GERD, difficult mask fit, or airway compromise).

                                    Cardiovascular            Relative contraindications to elective cardioversion include digitalis toxicity (toxic = > 3
                                                              ng/mL), ↓ K+, inadequate anticoagulation, presence of β-blockade, AV block. The presence
                                                              of significant CHF, CAD, or valvular disease may predispose this patient population to ↓ ↓
                                                              BP in response to anesthetic agents. Consider use of etomidate (0.1–0.2 mg/kg). Patients at
                                                              ↑ risk for embolization include those with Hx of embolization within 2 yr, mitral stenosis,
                                                              intraarterial thrombus, CHF, or hyperthyroidism. In these patients, ensure adequate anti-
                                                              coagulation (PT 1.5–2 × baseline, INR 2.0–3.0). It has been suggested that NTG patches
                                                              near the electrodes be removed prior to cardioversion to avoid risk of explosion.
                                                              Tests: ECG; TEE (3 for thrombus and size of atrium); digitalis level (toxic = > 3 ng/mL →
                                                              refractory VF following cardioversion); electrolytes; INR.

===== PAGE ? =====
Direct Current (DC) Cardioversion          1497

                    Endocrine             Hyperthyroidism → AF

                    Gastrointestinal      Full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5) may be necessary in the emergency patient.

                    Neurological          3 Hx for TIAs or CVAs → ↑ risk of embolic event. Pre- and postprocedure neurologic
                                          exams should be done.

                    Hematologic           3 need for anticoagulation (see above).

                    Laboratory            Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication         Usually not needed. For the emergency patient, take full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Brief GA with mask oxygenation and ventilation

                    Induction             Preoxygenate patient. For hemodynamically fragile patients, etomidate (0.1–0.2 mg/kg iv) is
                                          the agent of choice (NB: etomidate-induced clonus → ECG artifact). For the hemodynamically
                                          stable patient, use propofol (1.0–1.5 mg/kg iv slowly) until loss of lid reflex. Additional analgesia
                                          may be provided by remifentanil (1–2 mcg/kg iv), thereby reducing anesthetic requirements.

                    Maintenance           Occasionally necessary to repeat cardioversion. Additional small doses of propofol, etomi-
                                          date, or remifentanil may be required.

                    Emergence             Patients should awaken rapidly with full recovery of airway reflexes. Outpatients are usu-
                                          ally discharged to home within 1–2 h.

                    Blood and fluid       No blood loss
                       requirements       IV: 20 ga × 1
                                          NS/LR @ TKO

                    Monitoring            Standard monitors                   Avoid placement of ECG electrodes in precordial area.
                                          (see p. B-1).

                    Positioning           Hospital bed, supine                Procedure takes place at patient’s bedside.

                    Complications         Loss of airway                      Use airway manipulation ±  artificial airways; be prepared
                                                                              to intubate.
                                          VF                                  Use ACLS protocols.
                                          ↑ ↑ BP/myocardial ischemia          Cardioversion → catecholamine surge → acute MI in sus-
                                                                              ceptible patient population.
                                          Severe bradycardia                  Rx: Atropine (e.g., 0.4 mg iv)
                                          Thermal injury                      Ensure good electrode/skin contact.
                                          ↓ CO                                2° anesthetic drugs or myocardial stunning from cardio-
                                                                              version. Rx: inotropic support (e.g., ephedrine)
                                                                                                                                                          Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications         Recall                              Especially in hemodynamically fragile patients. D iscuss
                                                                              possibility with patient in advance.
                                          Systemic embolization               Neurological exam should be repeated postcardioversion.
                                          ↓ BP/↓ CO/CHF                       Atrial contraction may not be effective following cardio-
                                          New dysrhythmia                     version → ↓ CO/↓ BP.
                                          Renal dysfunction                   Incidence: 17%. 3 renal function labs.

                    Pain                  Minimal                             Myalgias not uncommon; consider ketorolac.
                      management

                    Tests                 ECG                                 Verify NSR.

===== PAGE ? =====
1498   c h a p t e r 13.1       Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Dell’Orfano JT, Naccarelli GV: Update on external cardioversion and defibrillation. Curr Opin Cardiol 2001; 16(1):54–7.
                                      2. Hellman Y, Cohen MJ, Leibowitz D, et al: The incidence and prognosis of renal dysfunction following cardioversion of atrial
                                         fibrillation. Cardiology 2013; 124(3):184–9.
                                      3. Hullander RM, Leivers D, Wingler K: A comparison of propofol and etomidate for cardioversion. Anesth Analg 1993; 77(4): 690–4.
                                      4. Santini L, Forleo GB, Topa A, et al: Electrical cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: different methods for a safe and effective
                                         technique. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther 2005; 3(4):601–10.

                                    Implantation of Cardioverter-Defibrillator
                                    (ICD) or Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
                                    Defibrillator (CRT-D)

                                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: The implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is an effective device for the prevention of premature
                                    death from ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF). The results of randomized trials involving
                                    survivors of cardiac arrest and those considered at risk for sudden death showed the superiority of ICD therapy over
                                    conventional medical therapy in lowering the incidence of sudden death and overall mortality. The MADIT II trial
                                    showed the device therapy to be advantageous over standard medical therapy in patients with low LVEF (< 30%).
                                    Over the past decade, significant advances have occurred in ICD technology. The devices have decreased dramati-
                                    cally in size (now < 30 cc) along with substantial increases in functionality. Newer devices can incorporate the full
                                    capabilities of a permanent pacemaker for bradycardia support and resynchronization therapy, as well as hemody-
                                    namic monitoring. Therapies for atrial tachyarrhythmias (atrial tachycardia and fibrillation) are also available in
                                    select devices. The more efficient biphasic waveform, which results in a much lower defibrillation threshold (DFT)
                                    and, hence, lowers required energy delivery and storage, is now standard for all ICDs. Implantation of these small
                                    ICDs results in mortality and morbidity rates very similar to those associated with standard pacemaker implantation.
                                    The device system consists of a small pulse generator and transvenous leads that are designed to record ventricu-
                                    lar depolarizations and deliver a shock via coils or patches. ICD terminates VT/VF by sensing these rhythms and
                                    responding with an appropriate countershock. The most common ICD implantation uses endocardial leads inserted
                                    percutaneously (transvenous approach) via pectoral (or, rarely, abdominal) subcutaneous/submuscular pulse gen-
                                    erator placement. In the unusual circumstances of difficult endocardial access or high DFT (> 25 J), additional leads
                                    can be placed either in the coronary sinus or subcutaneously. Very rarely would the leads (in the form of patches) be
                                    applied epicardially via a thoracotomy approach.
                                    In the transvenous approach, the insertion of leads and pulse generator requires minimal anesthesia; however, dur-
                                    ing testing of defibrillation efficacy, VF is induced once or twice and sometimes more frequently. Thus, in addition to
                                    continuous monitoring of VS and cardiac rhythm, the anesthesiologist should pay special attention to the patient’s
                                    hemodynamic stability prior to VF induction and after the defibrillation. In the event of failed defibrillation by the pro-
                                    grammed first shock, a somewhat prolonged VF may occur. In the case of repeated DFT testing, it is customary to give
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    at least 5-min intervals between VF inductions to allow for sufficient hemodynamic recovery. In patients with signifi-
           Procedures

                                    cant LV dysfunction, ↓ BP is not uncommon, but caution should be taken with fluid administration. If recovery from
                                    ↓ BP is slow, complications such as pneumo/hemothorax or pericardial effusion/tamponade should be considered. In
                                    the absence of a PA catheter (which would interfere with ICD lead positioning), accurate assessment of hemodynamic
                                    status is limited. Thus, meticulous attention should be directed at arterial pressure, HR, and oxygenation status. Finally,
                                    it is not uncommon to encounter acute atrial fibrillation (AF) from induction and conversion of VF. Fortunately, a car-
                                    dioversion can be applied easily, using the ICD itself or relying on the external rescue system (external cardioversion).
                                    The cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) was developed for heart failure (HF) patients with
                                    electrical and/or mechanical dyssynchrony, typically those with intraventricular conduction delay of LBBB type
                                    where the delay causes a mechanical dyssynchrony that increases systolic inefficiency. This form of therapy, in addi-
                                    tion to preventing premature sudden death from VT or VF, has been shown to reverse ventricular remodeling and
                                    improve objective and subjective measure of HF. This form of therapy requires implantation of a left-ventricular lead
                                    into one of the tributaries of the coronary sinus system.

===== PAGE ? =====
Implantation of Cardioverter-Defibrillator (ICD) or Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Defibrillator (CRT-D)          1499

                                Figure 13.1-2. Induced VF (with underlying AF) is shown on top panel, whereby the first
                                (24-J) shock failed to terminate VF but terminated AF (as indicated by the ICD annotation).
                                The second shock (34-J) terminated VF, resulting in V-paced rhythm with underlying sinus
                                and AV block. Total down-time during VF was 16 sec. Downtime is dependent on the
                                detection time and charge time, which, in turn, depend on the energy programmed.

                    There are significant differences between ICD/CRT-D implantation and pacemaker implantation. Patients undergo-
                    ing ICD/CRT-D implantation typically have moderate or severe HF, and their tolerance to sedation may be limited.
                    ICD/CRT-D implantation usually requires induction of VT/VF to assess defibrillation threshold (DFT), which re-
                    quires a transiently deeper level of sedation. An alternative to VT/VF induction is now available using the Upper
                    Limit of Vulnerability (ULV) method, whereby estimated defibrillation energy is delivered on the vulnerable T-wave
                    period and a failure to induce VF is accepted as the equivalent to the DFT. Nonetheless, VF induction should be
                   anticipated and prepared for. Finally, in CRT-D implantation, the placement of left ventricular lead within a coronary
                   vein tributary may require a significantly longer time than a simple pacemaker implantation.

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Documented, induced, or high-risk ventricular fibrillation; moderate-severe heart failure

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                       Supine with defibrillator pads positioned A-P or basilar-apical
                                                                                                                                                     Out-of-Operating Room
                     Incision                       Left pectoral or abdominal
                                                                                                                                                           Procedures

                     Special instrumentation        ICD pulse generator, lead(s), and testing system (manufacturer-specific)

                     Unique considerations          Multiple inductions of VT/VF with associated ↓ CO, ↓ BP

                     Antibiotics                    Standard iv antimicrobial for staphylococcus/streptococcus organism

                     Surgical time                  1–2 h (more for ICD with cardiac resynchronization [CRT])

                     Closing considerations         Routine subcutaneous/submuscular pocket closure

                     EBL                            5–20 mL

                     Postop care                    Monitoring of arrhythmia, pocket bleeding/hematoma, pneumothorax

                     Mortality                      0.1% (transvenous); ≤ 5% (thoracotomy)

===== PAGE ? =====
1500   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity                       New-onset arrhythmias: ≤ 5%
                                                                     Pneumothorax: ≤ 5% (transvenous)
                                                                     Pericardial effusion/tamponade: ≤ 1% (transvenous)

                                     Pain score                      3 (6–9, thoracotomy)

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range                       5–90 yr

                                     Male:Female                     4:1

                                     Incidence                       50,000/yr in the United States

                                     Etiology                        Reentry substrates from remote MI and cardiomyopathy; congenital anomalies (e.g.,
                                                                     Long-QT and Brugada syndromes)

                                     Associated conditions           LV dysfunction; CAD; cardiomyopathy; HTN; valvular disease; COPD; obesity; AF; CVA;
                                                                     anoxic encephalopathy

                                    Extraction of Pacemaker (PM) and Implantable
                                    Cardioverter-Defibrillator (ICD) Leads

                                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Permanent pacemaker (PM) implantation procedures have been performed for more than 50 years. With increas-
                                    ing knowledge of its clinical benefits and with the increased number of older patients, the utilization of PM therapy
                                    will continue to increase. Similarly, since its inception in the mid 1980s, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
                                    therapy has demonstrated clinical utility and the rate of ICD implantations is also expected to grow.
                                    Almost all PM and ICD systems are implanted utilizing endovascular lead(s). These leads have excellent longevity,
                                    typically beyond 25 years, and hence in the case of a PM implantation for sick sinus syndrome, the patient would
                                    not need any lead “replacement” procedure. However, in other scenarios involving younger patients (such as PM
                                    implantation in the pediatric population and ICD implantation in the young athlete), “replacement” may become
                                    necessary. Unfortunately, some leads may undergo premature degradation due to a manufacturing deficiency. In the
                                    majority of lead “replacement” (now more commonly called “revision”) procedures the simple addition of a new lead
                                    would suffice, but in some cases where multiple leads are already present, a “debulking” procedure is necessary to
                                    avoid vascular congestion or unwanted lead-to-lead interaction. Hence, removal of some, or all, of those leads would
                                    be necessary.
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    In some cases (e.g., refractory sepsis or bacteremia), lead removal is considered mandatory. There are other rare
           Procedures

                                    scenarios where lead removal is at least strongly recommended. Examples include progressive tricuspid valve regur-
                                    gitation that is suspected to be caused by the presence of multiple right ventricular leads and where the presence of
                                    multiple leads has caused a superior vena cava syndrome.
                                    Leads that have been implanted for longer than one year are likely to have adhered to the adjacent vascular wall or
                                    endocardial surface. Binding sites are typically located at the subclavian vein, the junction of the innominate vein and
                                    superior vena cava, along the superior vena cava, the tricuspid valve, and the right ventricular tissue (Fig. 13.1-3). The
                                    area at the junction of innominate vein and the superior vena cava and along the superior vena cava are the areas of
                                    concern in terms of risks for vascular tear because the sheath may not conform to the lead angulation.
                                    Extraction of chronically implanted leads typically requires extraction tools, including sheaths that are advanced
                                    over the leads to break the fibrotic tissue (Fig. 13.1-3). Advancement of sheaths can be done either with manual
                                    force or with the aid of thermal cutting (LASER or radiofrequency energy). In utilizing any of these methods, tissue
                                    injury is evitable and may result (0.5% increase) in transmural injury and rapid exsanguination. Thus, lead extraction

===== PAGE ? =====
Extraction of Pacemaker (PM) and Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator (ICD) Leads                      1501

                                                                                             15” beveled tip
                                                     The SLS II optical fibers                          Outer sheath
                                                     deliver excimer laser energy

                                                                                                  Radiopaque band

                                                                                       Cardiac lead

                               Figure 13.1-3. The laser sheath is placed over the lead to be extracted and advanced
                               into the heart. The laser is then used to ablate scar tissue surrounding the lead to
                               facilitate extraction.

                   procedures should be performed with complete preparation for immediate emergency sternotomy with a surgical
                   team on active standby. For all of the above reasons, GETA is a necessity. In addition, the patient should be prepped
                   and draped for possible sternotomy and surgical instruments and a cardiopulmonary bypass machine should be in
                   the room with the perfusionist team nearby. Blood should also be available because significant loss of blood can
                   occur. Vascular access should be large bore and a central line is advisable. Continuous blood pressure monitoring via
                   an arterial line is mandatory and continuous TEE or standby TTE should be used.
                   The surgical approach is similar to a standard implantation or pulse generator change. The patient will have continu-                         Out-of-Operating Room
                   ous ECG monitoring and external defibrillator/pacer pads applied. The pulse generator is removed from the pocket
                                                                                                                                                                       Procedures

                   as usual and the leads are released from encapsulation. For the patient who is pacemaker-dependent, a temporary
                   pacemaker is mandatory. The temporary pacemaker lead should be placed through a venous entry other than the one
                   being used for the extraction. If temporary pacing support is expected to be necessary for several days or weeks (e.g.,
                   in the case of an infected system when reimplantation is delayed), it has become customary to utilize a permanent
                   pacemaker lead with an active fixation, as this will provide more reliable backup pacing.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Kratz JM, Toole JM: Pacemaker and internal cardioverter defibrillator lead extraction: a safe and effective surgical approach.
                        Ann Thorac Surg 2010; 90(5):1411–7.
                     2. Wilkoff BL, Byrd CL, Love CJ, et al: Pacemaker lead extraction with the laser sheath: results of the Pacing Lead Extraction
                        with Excimer Sheath (PLEXES) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999; 33:1671–6.
                     3. Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, Byrd CL, et al: Transvenous lead extraction: Heart Rhythm Society expert consensus on facilities,
                        training, indications, and patient management. Heart Rhythm 2009; 6:1085–104.

===== PAGE ? =====
1502   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                                            Ablation
                                                            catheters
                                                                                                                           Treated areas
                                                                                                                           around all
                                                                                                                           pulmonary
                                                                                                                           veins

                                               Figure 13.1-4. A transvenous transeptor catheter electrode is used to ablate target
                                               areas around the pulmonary vein entry sites to treat atrial fibrillation. Other common
                                               target sites include atrial walls as well as SVC and coronary sinus inlets.

                                    Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation

                                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Catheter ablation involves placement of catheters onto the desired cardiac chambers via venous and/or
                                    arterial access (most commonly the femoral blood vessels), and more recently via pericardial space. Through the elec-
                                    trodes at the tip of the catheters, intracardiac (or epicardial in the case of pericardial approach) signals can be recorded,
                                    arrhythmias can be monitored and/or induced using specific pacing protocols, and small areas of cardiac tissue can be
                                    ablated using various modalities. The most common modality is radiofrequency (RF) energy. Other emerging ablation
                                    techniques include cooling with cryoenergy and heating using ultrasonic, LASER, and microwave modalities. For atri-
                                    al fibrillation (AF), the ablation is aimed at the triggers and substrates. The triggers can be found at various sites, most
                                    commonly at the entries of the pulmonary veins, superior vena cava, and coronary sinus into the left and right atria.
                                    The substrates for atrial fibrillation are believed to be in various areas on the left atrial wall, usually the posterior wall.
                                    Unlike catheter ablation procedures for other arrhythmias with a more focused area of interest, AF ablation requires
                                    energy delivery at a significantly greater number of sites. In most cases, the mapping and ablation are guided by a
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    three-dimensional tracking system. The procedure also requires access to the left atrium, typically via a transseptal
                                    catheterization, which is usually guided by intracardiac echocardiogram. In the typical scenarios, two transseptal
           Procedures

                                    sheaths are placed in the left atrium to facilitate recording, pacing, and application of ablation. Typically pulmonary
                                    vein isolation (PVI) is the basic approach. Left appendage isolation is also being performed in some centers. If elimi-
                                    nation of left atrial flutter substrate is a target, a significant amount of additional ablations are necessary. Typically a
                                    “roof ” line is created as well as a line connecting the left lower pulmonary vein to the mitral valve annulus.
                                    The procedure typically requires several (2–8) hours to complete. The patient is continuously anticoagulated with iv hepa-
                                    rin. Many centers are now performing the procedure with the patient already fully anticoagulated prior to the start of the
                                    procedure. One or more cardioversions may also be necessary, especially in patients with persistent AF. Furthermore,
                                    many centers are now using high-dose isoproterenol and adenosine after the ablation to assess likelihood of recurrence.
                                    GETA has been the standard modality for providing comfort and safety for patients. In addition to the length of
                                    the procedure, there is a higher risk for cardiac and vascular perforation compared to a simple ablation procedure.
                                    The significant volume of ablation is associated with an increased chance of left atrial perforation. A misdirected
                                    transseptal catheterization in itself can cause perforation of the aorta, posterior wall of the left atrium, and other
                                    structures. An emergency thoracotomy may be necessary. In addition to safety, GETA provides a stationary patient,

===== PAGE ? =====
Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation         1503

                   which is critical in the acquisition and maintenance of three-dimensional map accuracy. Transesophageal tempera-
                   ture monitoring has become a standard of care and would be poorly tolerated in unanesthetitized patients.
                   When feasible, AF ablation procedures should be performed in a hybrid procedure room such that, if needed, emer-
                   gency thoracotomy can be performed with minimal delay. Under expert operators, the need for emergency thora-
                   cotomy is low (under 1–2%) and hence surgical “standby” is not usually necessary, but this precautionary step is
                   advisable for centers with low patient volumes.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato T, et al: 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation
                        of atrial fibrillation: recommendations for patient selections, procedural techniques, patient management and follow-up,
                        definition, endpoints and research trial design. Heart Rhythm 2012; 9:632–96.
                     2. Ouyang F, Tiltz R, Chun J, et al: Long-term results of catheter ablation in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Lessons from a 5-year
                        follow-up. Circulation 2010; 122:2368–77.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ICD, CRT-D, AND
                          PACEMAKER PLACEMENT; LEAD EXTRACTION; CATHETER
                         ABLATION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for ICD/CRT-D placement may be divided into three populations, based on symptomatol-
                   ogy, associated pathology, and probable outcome: (a) Supraventricular dysrhythmias (e.g., Wolff-Parkinson-White
                   [WPW] syndrome): usually young and otherwise healthy patients. May be associated with Ebstein anomaly (tricus-
                   pid valve defect → RV failure), mitral valve disease, or CAD. Low periop mortality (1%). (b) Ventricular dysrhyth-
                   mias: usually older patients with significant ventricular dysfunction (EF = 10–35%) and other pathologies, such as
                   CAD or cardiac failure. These patients have either survived an episode of VT/VF or are otherwise at risk for sud-
                   den death. (c) Congestive heart failure (CHF) without significant dysrhythmias, usually 2° dilated cardiomyopathy.
                   These patients have very low EFs (10–25%), left bundle branch block, and Hx of failed conventional means of CHF
                   treatment. The CRT-D device is implanted in these patients to provide paced “resynchronization” of the contractions
                   of the LV and RV. This requires a third pacer lead placed into the coronary sinus to pace the LV independent of the
                   RV (see Fig. 3.1-5B). In this case, the device is not placed primarily for its defibrillator function, but for its ability to
                   pace both ventricles synchronously (biventricular pacing). Patients presenting for permanent pacemaker insertion
                   may have a variety of dysrhythmias, including sick sinus syndrome (SSS), heart blocks (2nd- and 3rd-degree), and
                   tachycardias refractory to medication. CRT patients may be quite frail with significant comorbidities.
                   Patients presenting for lead extraction typically have infected leads (often methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus) or,
                   less commonly, malfunctioning leads.
                   Patients presenting for catheter ablation usually have paroxysmal or chronic refractory atrial fibrillation and may be at sig-
                   nificant risk for thromboembolic events including stroke. They may be receiving a variety of medication, including digitalis,
                   amiodarone, aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin, direct thrombin inhibitors (e.g., dabigatran), or direct Factor Xa inhibitors (e.g.,
                   rivaroxaban, apixaban). The newer anticoagulants lack reversal agents and may increase the risk of refractory bleeding.

                                                                                                                                                                    Out-of-Operating Room
                    Respiratory                 May have associated pulmonary disease 2° smoking.
                                                Tests: CXR; consider PFT, as indicated from H&P.
                                                                                                                                                                          Procedures

                    Cardiovascular              ICD: ICD patients are left on full medication because it usually is impossible to wean them
                                                from antidysrhythmic medications before surgery. In most studies, patients have a mean
                                                LV EF of 35% and a New York Heart Association functional class of II or III.
                                                Supraventricular dysrhythmias: Look for precipitating factors in the dysrhythmia and any
                                                methods that have been used to terminate the dysrhythmia. Usually, drug therapy is termi-
                                                nated before surgery to make a dysrhythmia inducible. Note type of drugs used to terminate
                                                a dysrhythmia. Ventricular dysrhythmias: Ask about any methods that have been used to
                                                terminate dysrhythmia. Look for associated conditions, including CAD, CHF, cardiomyopa-
                                                thy, LV aneurysm, HTN, mitral insufficiency, diabetes. Generally, these patients have poor
                                                LV function with ↑ sensitivity to myocardial depressants. It is important to note that they
                                                may be on combinations of antidysrhythmics. Many of these drugs have significant negative
                                                inotropic effects. Of special note is amiodarone, which has been associated with intractable
                                                bradydysrhythmias, refractory vasodilation, and difficulty in weaning from CPB.

===== PAGE ? =====
1504   c h a p t e r 13.1   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                                                  Pacemaker
                                                                  leads

                                                                                                  Pacemaker

                                                                 Right
                                                                 atrium

                                                                    Right
                                                                    ventricle

                                                 A

                                                                                             Subclavian
                                                                                  Guide      vein
                                                                                  catheter

                                                                                               Coronary
                                                                                               sinus

                                                                                                              CRT-D

                                                Pacing
                                                lead

                                                             Right atrium                                     Coronary
                                                                                                              venous
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                                                                              system
           Procedures

                                                                                                               Coronary
                                                                                 Right                         venous
                                                                                ventricle                      lead

                                                                                               Left
                                                                                             ventricle

                                                                   Defibrillation
                                                B                  lead

                                             Figure 13.1-5. Placement of cardiac leads.

===== PAGE ? =====
Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation     1505

                    Cardiovascular           Pacemaker: The anesthesiologist should be aware that there is an NASPE code (North
                      (cont’d)               American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology) that describes pacemaker function
                                             with a three- to five-letter code. The first letter refers to the heart chamber that is paced
                                             and the second to the chamber that is sensed. These first two letters can be A (atrial),
                                             V (ventricular), or D (dual). The third letter indicates whether there is a triggering (T) or
                                             inhibiting (I) function, or both (D). For example, a VVI notation indicates that the ventricle
                                            is paced and sensed and there is inhibition by native beats. A fourth and fifth letter may be
                                            used to describe programmability and dysrhythmia control, respectively.
                                            Catheter ablation: Most commonly, presenting patients have medically refractory or
                                            paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and are at increased risk for thromboembolic events. Preop
                                            a ntidysrhythmic and anticoagulant medications should be managed in consultation with
                                             the prescribing physician and the interventional cardiologist.
                                             Infected leads: Patients with infected leads may have endocarditis, tricuspid valve dys-
                                            function, and sepsis.
                                            Tests: ECG: 3 dysrhythmia, ischemia, electrophysiologic report. ECHO: 3 ventricular
                                            function, wall motion abnormalities, valvular problems. Cardiac angiography: 3 ventricu-
                                            lar function, CAD, valvular disease, LV aneurysm.

                    Renal                   Patients with poor ventricular function may have associated renal compromise. Electrolyte
                                            abnormalities (K+, Mg++) may be associated with ↑ cardiac irritability and should be cor-
                                            rected preop.
                                            Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                    Hematologic             Hb/Hct; coag tests (PT, PTT, Plt)

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           For adults: midazolam 0.5–2.0 mg iv, with careful observation and supplemental O2.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Local anesthesia with sedation, GA with LMA, or GETA, as indicated. Catheter ablation
                   and placement of most ICDs, CRT-Ds and pacemakers are done in the cardiac catheterization suite. ICDs are very
                   small and are implanted in the same position as a pacemaker. If patients are orthopneic due to their CHF, or if the
                   procedure is projected to be long, GA is often preferable. Also, elderly patients may become disoriented with seda-
                   tion and, thus, may require GA. Lead extraction is often done under GETA.

                    Induction               Exact type of induction depends on the patient’s medical condition. Sedation can be pro-
                                            vided with small doses of midazolam (1–2 mg) ± fentanyl (25–50 mcg) titrated to effect. An
                                            alternative technique is to use a propofol infusion (e.g., 25–75 mcg/kg/min). Because local
                                            anesthesia is provided by the surgeon, the procedure usually is not painful and does not
                                            require postop pain control. It is important to avoid oversedating these patients because
                                            they will tend to become disoriented and uncooperative. Even if local anesthesia with seda-
                                            tion is provided for the placement of leads and the device, a brief period of GA is always                Out-of-Operating Room
                                            required for device testing. This can be provided easily with mask ventilation and induc-
                                                                                                                                                            Procedures

                                            tion with propofol (e.g., 1 mg/kg iv) or etomidate (e.g., 0.1 mg/kg iv), similar to anesthesia
                                            for cardioversion procedures. For those patients requiring GA for the entire procedure,  
                                            induction with STP (2–4 mg/kg), propofol (1–2 mg/kg), or etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) is
                                            often used. Muscle relaxants are not required unless intubation is planned. Narcotics usu-
                                            ally are not required because local anesthesia is used.

                    Maintenance             As previously discussed, verification of correct lead placement involves the induction of
                                            ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia and the testing of the device’s capability to restore
                                            NSR. External defibrillation should be available at all times, as should antidysrhythmics
                                            (e.g., lidocaine and amiodarone). While the device is tested, the patient should be breathing
                                            100% O2. Multiple testing cycles can result in depressed LV function, and inotropes may
                                            be needed.

===== PAGE ? =====
1506   c h a p t e r 13.1       Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Emergence                   These patients are extubated (if GETA or LMA used). Recovery is in the PACU. If, however,
                                                                multiple test shocks are needed or the heart displays evidence of injury (need for inotropes,
                                                                ST-segment abnormalities), then extubation may need to be deferred to ICU.

                                    Blood and fluid             IV: 16–18 ga × 1                             Care should be taken to minimize iv fluids in CHF
                                       requirements             NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h                          patients.

                                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1)
                                                                ± Arterial line
                                                                ± CVP/PA                                     A CVP or PA catheter may be placed according to
                                                                                                             LV function. ICD patients generally require only an
                                                                                                             arterial line.
                                                                External defibrillation                      Because antidysrhythmics may affect the testing pro-
                                                                                                             cedure, they should be avoided when possible. Defi-
                                                                                                             brillation or cardioversion is treatment of choice.
                                                                Temperature                                  Normothermia should be maintained.

                                    Positioning                 Supine
                                                                3 and pad pressure points
                                                                3 eyes

                                    Complications               Pneumohemothorax
                                                                Pericardial effusion/tamponade
                                                                HTN/CHF
                                                                Coronary sinus rupture                        Rarely, cardiac rupture may occur during lead
                                                                                                              extraction. Coronary sinus rupture has been
                                                                                                             reported during biventricular lead placement.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                    Complications               Recurrent dysrhythmias                       Pacemaker lead thrombosis → PE has been reported.
                                                                Hemorrhage
                                                                Ischemia

                                    Pain                        Usually managed with oral analgesics.
                                      management

                                    Tests                       CXR                                          3 line/lead placement, r/o pneumohemothorax.
                                                                ECG                                          3 for ischemia, dysrhythmias.
                                                                Electrophysiologic testing
                                                                Electrolytes

                                    Suggested Readings
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                     1. Bardy GH, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al: Amiodarone or an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for congestive heart failure.
                                        NEJM 2005; 352(3):225–37.
           Procedures

                                     2. Cox JL: Anatomic electrophysiologic basis for the surgical treatment of refractory ischemic ventricular tachycardia. Ann Surg
                                        1983; 198(2):119–29.
                                     3. Kedia R, Saeed M: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators: indications and unresolved issues. Tex Heart Inst J 2012; 39(3):335–41.
                                     4. Lee G, Sanders P, Kalman JM: Catheter ablation of atrial arrhythmias: state of the art. Lancet 2012; 380(9852):1509–19.
                                     5. Park KW: Nonsurgical therapy for heart failure. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 50(3):1–21.
                                     6. Rozner MA: The patient with cardiac pacemaker or implanted defibrillator and management during anesthesia. Curr Opin
                                        Anaesthesiol 2007; 20(3):261–8.
                                     7. Stahlberg M, Lung LH, Zabarovskaja S, Gadler F, Braunschweig F, Linde C: Cardiac resynchronization therapy: a breakthrough
                                        in heart failure management. J Intern Md 2012; 272(4):330–43.
                                     8. Swerdlow C, Shivkumar K, Zhang J: Determination of the upper limit of vulnerability using implantable cardioverter-
                                        defibrillator electrograms. Circulation 2003; 107:3028–33.
                                     9. Swygman C, Wang PJ, et al: Advances in implantable cardioverter defibrillators. Curr Opin Cardiol 2002; 17(1):24–8.
                                    10. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al: 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based
                                        therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities. Circulation 2012; 126:1784–800.
                                    11. Upadhyay GA, Mela T, Singh JP: The burden of inappropriate shocks in young people and how to avoid them. Heart 2012;
                                        98(19):1457–66.

===== PAGE ? =====
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS)         1507

                   Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic
                   Shunt (TIPS)

                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Hepatic cirrhosis is a progressive disease that eventually results in portal HTN and the development
                   of varices at a variety of sites. Bleeding from esophageal varices is a serious complication of portal HTN, occurring
                   in 25% of patients within 1 year of diagnosis (~50% mortality). Prior to 1989, surgically placed shunts were used to
                   direct high-pressure portal blood into the systemic venous circulation in patients with recurrent bleeding after endo-
                   scopic sclerotherapy or banding. The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure has almost
                   completely replaced surgical shunts.
                   TIPS is, as the name suggests, a percutaneous shunt between the portal and systemic circulations. The shunt is
                   created between the hepatic vein and portal vein within the liver parenchyma, maintained by placement of a stent
                   graft. This creates a low-resistance conduit to decompress the portal circulation, thereby decreasing variceal blood

                           A                                                    B

                                                                                                                                                    Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                          Procedures

                           C                                                    D

                               Figure 13.1-6. TIPS placement: A: Sheathed Colapinto needle is advanced out of
                               hepatic vein into portal vein branch. Varices are present. B: Guidewire is advanced
                               through the needle sheath into splenic vein. C: Parenchymal liver tract is dilated using
                               a balloon angioplasty catheter. D: The metallic stent is deployed within the shunt tract.
                               (Redrawn with permission from Haskal ZJ, Ring F: Current Techniques in Interventional
                               Radiology. Current Science, Philadelphia: 1994.)

===== PAGE ? =====
1508   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    flow and ascites formation. Although it can be performed with conscious sedation, balloon dilation of the tract is
                                    extremely painful, typically requiring GA.
                                     TIPS was developed initially by Rosch in dog studies in 1969. The first percutaneous portosystemic shunts were
                                    performed in humans using an angioplasty balloon in 1982, but the tract closed due to elastic recoil of the cirrhotic
                                     liver tissue. Palmaz and Richter performed the first successful TIPS in humans in 1989, using metallic stents to main-
                                     tain the patency of the tract. Since then, TIPS has become the procedure of choice for patients who fail sclerotherapy
                                     and banding. In addition, it addresses another common problem associated with cirrhosis: refractory ascites.
                                    Through the right IJ, a 10 Fr sheath is placed in the upper IVC. A catheter/guidewire combination is used to select the
                                    right hepatic vein. A wedged hepatic venogram using CO2 is performed. Injection of iodinated contrast can result in
                                    rupture of the liver capsule and exsanguination. The wedged venogram refluxes contrast through the sinusoids and
                                    into the portal vein, thereby providing a map. The catheter is exchanged over a stiff wire for a metallic introducer/
                                    needle. A variety of needle kits are available including the Colapinto (Cook Inc., Bloomington, IN), Rosch-Uchida
                                    (Cook Inc., Bloomington, IN), and Hawkins set designed for CO2 injections (Angiodynamics, Queensbury, NY). All
                                    include a long introducer sheath and coaxially inserted curved-tip needle or metal cannula, with directional indica-
                                    tor, to help steer the needle toward the right portal vein.
                                    Portal venous pressures are measured, and the pressure gradient between the portal vein and right atrium is deter-
                                    mined. Following a portal venogram, the catheter is exchanged for an angioplasty balloon and the tract dilated (Fig.
                                    13.1-6C). The use of covered stents for TIPS creation led to significantly improved patency rates, and for this reason,
                                    the Viatorr (Gore, Flagstaff, AZ) self-expanding covered stent has largely replaced the bare metal stents. The Viatorr
                                    is positioned across the tract, and the uncovered portion is first deployed within the portal venous system (Fig. 13.1-
                                    6D). The covered portion is then pulled into the tract and deployed in a separate step. The stent may be dilated to a
                                    diameter of 8–10 mm using an angioplasty balloon, depending on the stent diameter and desired portosystemic gra-
                                    dient. If necessary, a second stent is deployed to cover any remaining unstented portions of the hepatic tract. Follow-
                                    ing TIPS creating, portal venogram and pressure gradients are remeasured. Ideally, the pressure gradient following
                                    shunting should be between 6 and 12 mm Hg. If the gradient is too high, there is a risk of rebleeding; if too low, there
                                    is overshunting of blood, thus bypassing the entire portal venous system and increasing the risk of encephalopathy
                                    and liver failure. After successful creation of the shunt, all devices, including the right jugular sheath, are removed,
                                    and hemostasis is achieved. Patients are closely monitored in an ICU or step-down unit for 24–48 h.
                                    DIPS (Direct IVC-to-portal shunt) is a newer alternative to TIPS. Simultaneous venous access is required from both
                                    the internal jugular vein and common femoral vein. For DIPS, an intravascular ultrasound probe is used to guide
                                    needle puncture from the IVC, through the caudate lobe, and into the main portal vein. Because the tract traverses
                                    extrahepatic regions, placement of a covered stent is mandatory. A theoretically fewer number of passes is needed to
                                    access the portal vein because the puncture is ultrasound guided; however, there is likely a greater risk of intraperi-
                                    toneal hemorrhage with each puncture attempt.
                                    If TIPS/DIPS is performed for the treatment of bleeding varices, it may be necessary to embolize and sclerose the vari-
                                    ces if they persistently fill following shunt creation. This may be accomplished using sclerosing agents (e.g., ethanol-
                                    amine) with an occlusion balloon and embolic agents (e.g., metallic coils, Gelfoam), depending on operator preference.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Bleeding esophageal varices (as a result of portal HTN); ascites; Budd-Chiari and hepa-
                                    torenal syndromes

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                     Position                Supine
           Procedures

                                     Incision                Right IJ access

                                     Special                 Rosch-Uchida, Colapinto, or Hawkins needle set; angioplasty balloons; endovascular stent grafts,
                                       instrumentation       marker pigtail, CO2 injection apparatus, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) for DIPS, embolic agents
                                                             (e.g., coils, Gelfoam, ethanolamine) for variceal embolization/sclerosis if necessary.

                                     Unique                  May need FFP
                                       considerations

                                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                     Procedure time          2–6 h

                                     EBL                     0–3000 mL

===== PAGE ? =====
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS)                            1509

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care                      ICU or step-down unit; careful fluid management

                     Mortality                        Emergency: 50–100%
                                                      Postprocedure: See Tables 13.1-2, 13.1-3, 13.1-4, 13.1-5

                     Morbidity                        Encephalopathy: 18–30%
                                                      Late liver failure: 10–25%
                                                      Shunt occlusion: 10%/yr
                                                      Liver capsule puncture → intraperitoneal hemorrhage (continue procedure to decompress portal
                                                      venous system → ↓ bleeding).
                                                      Hepatic artery puncture: may require embolization.
                                                      Allergic reactions (see Contrast-related complications, p. 1494).
                                                      MI (related to ↑ CVP)
                                                      Renal failure (usually transient)

                     Pain score                       7–8 (first few hours only)

                    Table 13.1-2. MELD Score Calculation
                    The MELD (Model for End-stage Liver Disease) score is calculated using three objective indicators—serum bilirubin, serum
                    creatinine level (Cr), and international normalized ratio (INR)—according to the United Network for Organ Sharing modifica-
                    tion of the original formula:

                                                   MELD = 9.6 × log e (Cr) + 3.8 × log e (Bilirubin) + 11.2 × log e (INR) + 6.4

                    The MELD Score can easily be calculated by accessing the following website:
                    http://www.mayoclinic.org/meld/mayomodel7.html

                    Table 13.1-3. Overall Mortality Based on MELD Score
                                                                                                                   Mortality Rate (%)
                    MELD Score                   No. of Patients                 30 d                            3 mo                               6 mo
                    ≤10%                         28                              0 (0, 0)                        0 (0, 0)                           0 (0, 0)
                    11–17                        83                              7.3 (1.7, 12.9)                 16.0 (8.0, 24.0)                   24.9 (15.1, 34.7)
                    18–24                        40                              17.9 (5.9, 29.9)                34.8 (19.4, 50.2)                  38.6 (22.4, 54.9)
                    ≥25                          15                              42.6 (16.7, 68.4)               65.5 (39.9, 91.2)                  74.2 (50.0, 98.3)
                    Patients undergoing elective TIPS creation with a MELD score of 18 or more had a significantly lower 3-mo survival rate than those with a MELD score of 17 or
                    less. Numbers in parentheses are 95% confidence intervals. Mortality tables reprinted with permission from Ferral H, Gamboa P, Postoak DW, et al: Survival after
                    elective transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation: prediction with Model for End-Stage Liver Disease Score. Radiology 2004; 231(1):231–6.

                                                                                                                                                                                               Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Procedures

                    Table 13.1-4. Mortality Based on MELD Score and Cause of Cirrhosis
                                                                                                                        Mortality Rate (%)
                    MELD Score              Group*               No. of Patients              30 d                          3 mo                           6 mo
                    ≤17                     A                    39                           5.1 (0, 12.1)                 7.7 (0, 16.1)                  13.9 (2.5, 25.2
                                            B                    72                           5.6 (0.3, 11.0)               14.4 (6.1, 22.7)               21.4 (11.3, 31.4)
                    ≥18                     A                    14                           42.9 (16.9, 68.8)             57.1 (31.2, 83.1)              57.1 (31.2, 83.1)
                                            B                    41                           17.9 (5.9, 29.9)              37.9 (22.0, 53.7)              45.9 (28.1, 63.2)
                    A = Alcohol-induced disease, B = Non–alcohol-induced disease
                    Patients undergoing elective TIPS creation with a MELD score of 18 or more had a significantly lower 3-mo survival rate than those with a MELD score of 17 or
                    less. Numbers in parentheses are 95% confidence intervals. Mortality tables reprinted with permission from Ferral H, Gamboa P, Postoak DW, et al: Survival after
                    elective transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation: prediction with Model for End-Stage Liver Disease Score. Radiology 2004; 231(1):231–6.

===== PAGE ? =====
1510   c h a p t e r 13.1             Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Table 13.1-5. Mortality Based on MELD Score and Ascites
                                                                                                                                              Mortality (%)
                                    MELD Score               Ascites             No. of Patients               30 d                         3 Mo                           6 Mo
                                    ≤17                      No                  48                            4.2 (0, 9.8)                 4.2 (0, 9.8)                   4.2 (0, 9.8)
                                                             Yes                 63                            6.4 (0.3, 12.5)              18.4 (8.6, 28.3)               31.3 (18.6, 43.9)
                                    ≥18                      No                  18                            22.2 (3.0, 41.4)             39.8 (16.8, 62.8)              46.5 (22.6, 70.4)
                                                             Yes                 37                            25.4 (11.0, 39.8)            44.4 (27.4, 61.4)              48.7 (31.1, 66.3)
                                    Patients undergoing elective TIPS creation with a MELD score of 18 or more had a significantly lower 3-mo survival rate than those with a MELD score of 17 or
                                    less. Numbers in parentheses are 95% confidence intervals. Mortality tables reprinted with permission from Ferral H, Gamboa P, Postoak DW, et al: Survival after
                                    elective transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation: prediction with Model for End-Stage Liver Disease Score. Radiology 2004; 231(1):231–6.

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                          PREOPERATIVE
                                    Patients presenting for TIPS procedures have portal HTN usually 2° end-stage liver disease (ESLD), which will affect
                                    the function of a variety of organ systems, as described below.

                                    Respiratory                        Abdominal distension → atelectasis → ↑ pulmonary shunting → hypoxemia (hepatopul-
                                                                       monary syndrome in ESLD).
                                                                       Encephalopathy → hyperventilation → ↓ PaCO2 (respiratory alkalosis with chronic acido-
                                                                       sis as compensation). Pulmonary effusion may be present in 5–10% of patients.
                                                                       Tests: 3 CXR (for Sx of atelectasis); ABG and PFT, if indicated.

                                    Cardiovascular                     Cardiomyopathy (ETOH) and CAD (tobacco) occur at higher incidence in this patient
                                                                       population. Diuretic therapy → hypovolemia + ↓ K+ (furosemide) or ↑ K+ (spironolactone).
                                                                       Hyperdynamic circulation 2° to ↓ peripheral resistance + ↓ cardiac reserve are common
                                                                       findings and correlate with poor postop outcome.
                                                                       Tests: ECG; electrolytes; cardiac ECHO, if indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological                       Symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy range from mild confusion to coma. These patients
                                                                       may be very sensitive to narcotics and sedatives. A characteristic finding in liver failure is
                                                                       asterixis (liver flap). Hyponatremia and hypoglycemia may mimic hepatic encephalopathy.
                                                                       Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Hepatic                            Drug metabolism may be markedly reduced; anticipate prolonged effect with sedative and
                                                                       narcotic drugs. Drugs with particularly prolonged action include midazolam, meperidine,
                                                                       ranitidine, and lidocaine. Apparent resistance to pancuronium and all muscle relaxants
                                                                       is most likely due to an increased volume of distribution. Succinylcholine effects may be
                                                                       prolonged in patients with severe ESLD (2° ↓ plasma cholinesterase).
                                                                       Tests: Bilirubin; PT; albumin; LFTs

                                    Gastrointestinal                   Ascites → ↑ intraabdominal pressure → ↑ risk of aspiration. Full-stomach precautions and
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                                       rapid-sequence induction are recommended (see p. B-5). Portal HTN → variceal bleeding.
                                                                       If possible, avoid esophageal instrumentation (e.g., TEE, esophageal stethoscope). Gastritis
           Procedures

                                                                       and peptic ulceration may be present.

                                    Renal                              Oliguric renal failure may complicate ESLD (hepatorenal syndrome). This may be revers-
                                                                       ible if liver failure improves. Differential Dx includes prerenal azotemia and acute tubular
                                                                       necrosis.
                                                                       *NB: Bilirubin metabolites interfere with creatinine measurement and may mask ↑ creati-
                                                                       nine levels.
                                                                       Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                                    Endocrine                          Hypoglycemia may be present in cases of severe cirrhosis. ESLD patients may have
                                                                       ↓ response to catecholamines.
                                                                       Tests: Glucose

===== PAGE ? =====
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS)              1511

                    Hematologic              Patients may be anemic 2° GI bleeding. The majority of patients will exhibit coagulopathy 2° ↓
                                             hepatic synthetic function (all factors except VIII and fibrinogen) and ↓ Plt. Patients may
                                             require vitamin K (if coagulopathy is present and time permits), FFP (if PT > 2 sec above baseline),
                                             or Plt transfusion (if Plt < 100 K) before procedure; these products should be readily available.
                                             Tests: CBC; Plt; PT; others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Patients with significant ascites will require full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5).
                                             *NB: Benzodiazepines should be used with caution in liver failure patients.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: In some patients (and at some centers), sedation with local anesthesia may be satisfactory;
                   however, balloon dilation of the intrahepatic tract can be exceedingly painful. Remember, these patients may be very
                   sensitive to narcotics → respiratory arrest. GETA is often necessary to provide adequate analgesia and airway protection.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) is necessary in patients with encephalopathy,
                                             abdominal distention, and recent variceal bleeds (blood in the stomach).

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). If muscle relaxation is to be maintained, low-dose
                                             vecuronium (1–1.5 mcg/kg/min), cisatracurium (3 mcg/kg/min infusion), or rocuronium
                                              (5–15 mcg/kg/min) may be used to maintain muscle relaxation.

                    Emergence                Extubate when the patient is awake and protective laryngeal reflexes are present. Patient
                                             should be transferred to PACU accompanied by anesthesiologist.

                    Blood and fluid          Potential for large blood loss            Glucose-containing solutions may be required for
                       requirements          IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                        patients with hepatic failure ±  CHF. 3 blood glu-
                                             FFP available                             cose levels frequently. Vasopressor response may be
                                             Plt available                             impaired.
                                             2–4 U PRBC available
                                             NS/LR (as appropriate)

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1)            Ventricular arrhythmias can be provoked by hepat-
                                                                                       ic vein catheterization.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points                 Radiology tables usually are not well padded →
                                             3 eyes                                    nerve damage.

                    Complications            Portal vein rupture                       Intraabdominal hemorrhage may be massive and
                                             Liver capsule perforation                 require emergency surgery.
                                             Complete heart block                      Patients with preexisting LBBB may require a pace-
                                                                                       maker pre-TIPS (2° risk of RBBB during procedure).
                                             CHF                                       Shunt → ↑↑ venous return → CHF
                                                                                                                                                            Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                  Procedures

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Portal vein thrombus                      May mimic symptoms of PE or MI.
                                             ↑ encephalopathy                          2° ↓ hepatic portal blood flow
                                             Sepsis
                                             Bleeding                                  May require hemodynamic support (e.g., dopamine)
                                             Fluid/electrolyte disturbance             Stent insertion → ↑ venous return → ↑ diuresis →
                                                                                       electrolyte/fluid imbalance.

                    Pain                     IV opiates
                      Management

===== PAGE ? =====
1512   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Cejna M, Peck-Radosavljevic M, Thurnher S, et al: Creation of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts with stent-
                                         grafts: initial experiences with a polytetrafluoroethylene-covered Nitinol endoprosthesis. Radiology 2001; 221:437–46.
                                      2. Charon JM, Alaeddin FH, Pimpalwar SA, et al: Results of a retrospective multicenter trial of the Viatorr expanded
                                         polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stent-graft for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation. J Vasc Interv Radiol
                                         2004; 15:1219–30.
                                      3. Fidelman N, Kwan SW, LaBerge JM, Gordon RL, Ring EJ, Kerlan RK Jr: The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt: an
                                         update. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012; 199(4):746–55.
                                      4. Gaba RC, Khiatani VL, Knuttinen MG, et al: Comprehensive review of TIPS technical complications and how to avoid them.
                                         AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011; 196(3):675–85.
                                      5. Hausegger KA, Karnel F, Georgieva B, et al: Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation with the Viatorr expanded
                                         polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stent graft. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2004; 15:239–48.
                                      6. Huonker M, Schumacher YO, Ochs A, et al: Cardiac function and haemodynamics in alcoholic cirrhosis and effects of the
                                         transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt. Gut 1999; 44(5):743–8.
                                      7. Nicoll A, Fitt G, Angus P, et al: Budd-Chiari syndrome: intractable ascites managed by a trans-hepatic portocaval shunt.
                                         Australas Radiol 1997; 41(2):169–72.
                                      8. Petersen B: Intravascular ultrasound-guided direct intrahepatic portocaval shunt: description of technique and technical
                                         refinements. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2003; 14:21–32.
                                      9. Riggio O, Nardelli S, Moscucci F, Pasquale C, Ridola L, Merli M: Hepatic encephalopathy after transjugular intrahepatic
                                         portosystemic shunt. Clin Liver Dis 2012; 16(1):133–46.
                                     10. Wadei HM: Hepatorenal syndrome: a critical update. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 33(1):55–69.

                                    Endoscopic Retrograde
                                    Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)

                                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: ERCP was originally used as a diagnostic procedure; however, it is now almost exclusively used for
                                    therapeutic purposes. As with many invasive procedures, success (including the absence of complications) is well
                                    correlated with operator experience. Basically, ERCP consists of passing an endoscope through the mouth, esopha-
                                    gus, and stomach into the duodenum, where the papilla of Vater is located. A catheter (sometimes preceded by a
                                    wire) is inserted through the sphincter of Oddi into the common bile duct or pancreatic duct (see Fig. 13.1-7). At that
                                    point, contrast can be injected, tissue sampled, stones extracted, stents placed, or a sphincterotomy accomplished.
                                    The endoscopist may request administration of glucagon (0.25–2 mg iv) to decrease duodenal motility and/or
                                    secretin (0.2 mcg/kg iv over 1 min) to help locate the minor papilla.
                                    The overall complication rate is 5–10%, being < 5% for simple stone extraction to 20% or more for sphincterot-
                                    omy. Post-ERCP pancreatitis is the most common complication (up to 40%), being more common in young pa-
                                    tients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and normal bilirubin levels. Placement of a pancreatic stent may reduce
                                    the risk of post-ERCP pancreatitis and is commonly used in high-risk patients. Unfortunately, stent placement it-
                                    self may cause complications, including ductal and parenchymal injury and ductal stenosis. Balloon dilation as an
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    alternative sphincterotomy has been associated with a higher risk of pancreatitis.
           Procedures

                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Patients typically present with persistent pain or jaundice as a result of gallstones or other
                                    disease processes (e.g., infection, tumor, pancreatitis) that obstruct the bile duct and/or pancreatic duct.

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                     Position                  Initially left lateral decubitus, rotating to prone

                                     Incision                  None

                                     Special                   Endoscope (duodenoscope) and supporting equipment; mouth guard; fluoroscopy
                                       instrumentation

                                     Unique                    X-ray protection will be required; glucagon may be requested (0.25–2 mg iv 10 min before pro-
                                       considerations          cedure; contraindications: pheochromocytoma, insulinoma)

===== PAGE ? =====
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)      1513

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics              Ciprofloxacin 500 mg po 30–60 min before procedure is common

                     Procedure time           45–90 min

                     EBL                      Usually minimal

                     Postop care              PACU → home (occasional overnight stay for stone removal or stent placement)

                     Mortality                Rare

                     Morbidity                Pancreatitis: typically 5% (1–40% reported)
                                              Bowel or duct perforation: < 1%
                                              Hemorrhage: 0.1–2%
                                              Cholangitis/cholecystitis
                                              Aspiration
                                              Cardiopulmonary (e.g., myocardial ischemia, respiratory arrest)

                     Pain score               2–4

                                                                      Liver                                                  Esophagus

                              Gallbladder

                                                                                                                             Stomach

                                                                                                                 Pancreas
                       Endoscope
                                                                                                                                                 Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                       Procedures

                             Papilla

                                                                              Pancreatic duct
                                       Duodenum
                                                                Common bile duct

                               Figure 13.1-7. Anatomy for ERCP.

===== PAGE ? =====
1514   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                         PREOPERATIVE
                                    Patients presenting for ERCP most commonly have obstruction of hepatic and/or pancreatic ducts.  They may be
                                    jaundiced with elevation of both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin or exhibit Sx of pancreatic disease with
                                    a ssociated peritoneal and pleural effusions.  As a result of underlying disease processes (typically ASA 3-4), they may
                                    be quite frail with limited physiologic reserve.  Discuss intraprocedure management with the endoscopist.

                                    Respiratory               Airway evaluation should focus on the need for GETA. Access to the airway may be lim-
                                                              ited during the procedure. Ascites and pleural fluid accumulation → impaired ventilation,
                                                              ↑ aspiration risk. Gas insufflated during the procedure may further compromise ventila-
                                                              tion and ↑ aspiration risk.  Rales/percussive dullness suggests pulmonary edema/effusion.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular            ECG changes are not uncommon during this procedure, and a preop ECG may be helpful.
                                                              Hypotension is not uncommon.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological              Altered mental status may result from impaired hepatic function.

                                    Hepatic                   Hepatic dysfunction → coagulopathy, altered drug metabolism, and other metabolic dis-
                                                              turbances. Jaundice is common.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Renal                     ↑ BUN/Cr suggest volume depletion or acute renal failure. In acute pancreatitis, fluid defi-
                                                              cit may be severe; volume resuscitate before proceeding.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Endocrine                 ↑ glucose > 180 mg% should be treated preop.
                                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication             Morphine may ↑ sphincter of Oddi tone → ↑ductal pressure + ↑ pain.
                                                              Midazolam 1–2 mg iv may be appropriate in the anxious patient.
                                                              Consider aspiration prophylaxis (e.g., Bicitra™ 30 cc po; avoid metoclopramide)

                                    INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: Deep sedation using propofol (avoiding respiratory depression or loss of protective airway
                                    reflexes) supplemented with topical anesthesia of the oropharynx is sufficient for many ERCP procedures.  GETA is
                                    associated with a higher procedure success rate and should be considered for complex ERCP procedures, patients at
                                    high risk for aspiration, or uncooperative patients.
                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction                 Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) is necessary in patients with gastroparesis or
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                              abdominal distention. Otherwise standard induction (see p. B-2). Consider etomidate
           Procedures

                                                              (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) for hemodynamically unstable patients.

                                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). An immobile patient will be appreciated by the endos-
                                                              copist.  Manipulation of the endoscope may cause ETT movement → mainstem intubation
                                                              or extubation.

                                    Emergence                 The duodenum and stomach should be decompressed by the endoscopist before extuba-
                                                              tion.  Standard emergence (see p. B-4).

                                    Blood and fluid           IV: 18 ga × 1                            Patients with acute pancreatitis may be hypovolemic
                                       requirements           NS/LR 3–5 mL/kg/h

                                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          3 glucose in patients receiving glucagon.
                                                              ± Arterial line

===== PAGE ? =====
Imaging and Image-Guided Procedures            1515

                    Positioning               Left lateral decubitus → prone
                                              3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes

                    Complications             Pancreatitis
                                              Myocardial ischemia                      Δ ECG may occur in 25% of patients > 65 yo.
                                              Aspiration

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Myocardial ischemia
                                              Hypoxemia
                                              Hemorrhage

                    Pain                      Usually managed with oral
                                                                                       Avoid morphine (↑ sphincter of Oddi tone).
                      Management              analgesics

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Correia LM, Bonilha DQ, Gomes GF, et al: Sedation during upper GI endoscopy in cirrhotic outpatients: a randomized,
                        controlled trial comparing propofol and fentanyl with midazolam and fentanyl. Gastrointest Endosc 2011; 73(1):45–51.
                     2. Freeman ML: Complications of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: avoidance and management. Gastrointest
                        Endosc Clin N Am 2012; 22(3):567–86.
                     3. Goulson DT, Fragneto RY: Anesthesia for gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures. Anesthesiol Clin 2009; 27(1):71–85.
                     4. Martindale SJ: Anaesthetic considerations during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. Anaesth Intensive Care
                        2006; 34(4):475–80.

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Wire Guided Cannulation Techniques, S Edmundowicz, MD: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvwTK-BlEeg
                   Dilation Assisted Stone Extraction (DASE), Dr. Abhitabh Patil, MD:
                   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddFVd3TjdNU&list=PL180C343051A415CF&index=1
                   Animation of Dilation Assisted Stone Extraction (DASE):
                   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O-h0j8AUE0Y&list=PL180C343051A415CF

                   Imaging and Image-Guided Procedures                                                                                                    Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                         PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Projectional imaging includes x-ray fluoroscopy, and cross-sectional imaging includes computed
                   tomography (CT), ultrasound (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These techniques have become indis-
                   pensable in modern diagnosis. In addition, a growing number of invasive procedures are being performed using
                   imaging for guidance, not only for diagnostic purposes but also for therapeutic purposes. Indications include Dx
                   of primary or metastatic tumors; tumor staging; Dx of benign processes, including infections; drainage of fluid col-
                   lections; local-regional treatment of tumors and vascular malformations, endovascular treatment of hemorrhage,
                   vascular malformations, aneurysms, and dissections; percutaneous treatment of urinary and biliary obstructions;
                   and placement of venous access devices. Selection of imaging modality depends on ease of identification of the
                   target lesion and resolution of surrounding and intervening structures. Patient compliance is crucial to success
                   because image resolution and spatial accuracy require the patient to be immobile during image acquisition and

===== PAGE ? =====
1516   c h a p t e r 13.1     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    the procedure itself. In compliant adults, most of these procedures may be done using moderate sedation. For pro-
                                    cedures in the pediatric population, as well as for more invasive procedures in adults, GA is frequently necessary.

                                    Diagnostic imaging: Pediatric: In general, moderate sedation is sufficient to ensure pediatric patient compli-
                                    ance for diagnostic CT, US, or MRI, but occasionally GA is necessary (see Section 13.2). Adults: Almost all CT,
                                    US, and MRI studies are performed without anesthesia. Approximately 5% of adult patients are too claustropho-
                                    bic to complete an MRI study. Some of these may benefit from sedation, but use of GA is rare. Most patients with
                                    implanted pacemaker and ICDs can safely undergo MRI if appropriate precautions are observed (see Fig. 13.1-8).

                                    Image-guided procedures: Pediatric: Procedures performed on the pediatric patient routinely require GA
                                    (see Section 13.2). Adults: X-ray fluoroscopy and CT- and US-guided procedures, including biopsies, fluid drain-
                                    age, and tissue ablation, are routinely performed under moderate sedation. More invasive and painful proce-
                                    dures, such as stent-graft repair of aneurysms and dissections, and radiofrequency (RF) ablation of unresectable
                                    tumors (see p. 1526), frequently require GA, spinal, or epidural anesthesia. The required site of access and the
                                    positioning of the operators should be considered before the procedure. Position of the ETT and central lines can
                                    be immediately confirmed using fluoroscopy. Occasionally, iv injection of iodinated contrast medium is neces-
                                    sary, and adverse reactions—such as urticaria, airway edema, hormone release (e.g., from pheochromocytoma),
                                    or anaphylaxis—may occur.

                                    The field of MRI-guided procedures—sometimes referred to as interventional MRI (iMRI) or magnetic reso-
                                    nance-guided therapy (MRT)—reflects the emergence of new magnet geometries, allowing physician access to the
                                    patient during imaging. These geometries may be C-arm configurations, parallel discs above and below the
                                    patient, or dual rings where the patient is placed either through the apertures of the rings or perpendicularly
                                    between the rings. Faster image-acquisition pulse sequences are allowing near-real-time feedback. In addition
                                    to guiding biopsies and drainage, this technology enables more aggressive procedures, such as craniotomies or
                                    percutaneous tumor ablations, to be performed with immediate feedback showing the progress of excision or
                                    ablation. Clearly, many of these procedures require GA and, accordingly, require MRI-compatible monitoring and
                                    anesthetic equipment. For safety, the anesthesiologist also is subject to the same restrictions that apply to patients,
                                    so having a pacemaker, ICD, ferromagnetic aneurysm clips, or a metallic foreign body in the orbit precludes that
                                    person’s suitability to perform these cases. Hybrid systems also are being marketed, combining MRI and x-ray
                                    fluoroscopy, CT and x-ray fluoroscopy, or CT and positron emission tomography (PET). These may involve over-
                                    lapping precautions and risks.

                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Tumor, primary or metastatic; lymphadenopathy; abscess, effusion, empyema, pseu-
                                    docyst, or other fluid collection; arterial occlusive disease; aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm; trauma; DVT;
                                    cirrhosis

                                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                             CT/X-ray Fluoroscopy                  US                       MRI/MRT

                                     Position                Supine, prone, or lateral decubitus   ⇐                        ⇐ + sitting

                                     Unique                  Metallic objects should be kept out   No ionizing radiation.   All equipment, including moni-
                                       considerations        of the CT imaging field. Exit the     Room lights are fre-     tors, valves, anesthesia ma-
                                                             procedure room during scanning        quently dimmed for       chine, O2 tanks, laryngoscopes,
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             to avoid radiation exposure, or use   better viewing of the    etc., must be nonferromagnetic.
                                                             protective lead garment. Contrast     screen.                  Other metals should be re-
           Procedures

                                                             reaction possible.                                             moved from the imaging field to
                                                                                                                            avoid artifact.

                                     Antibiotics             Indicated for open procedures         ⇐                        ⇐
                                                             or when draining infected fluid
                                                             collections, including abscesses,
                                                             empyemas, and obstructed biliary
                                                             or urinary systems.

                                     Procedure time          0.5–2+ h                              ⇐                        ⇐

===== PAGE ? =====
Imaging and Image-Guided Procedures             1517

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                            CT/X-ray Fluoroscopy                    US                          MRI/MRT

                     EBL                    Procedure dependent; may be             ⇐                           ⇐
                                            internal hemorrhage, may be pre-
                                            existing hemorrhage

                     Postop care            PACU → room                             ⇐                           ⇐

                     Mortality              Rare                                    ⇐                           ⇐

                     Morbidity              Contrast reaction                       ⇐                           ⇐
                                            Hemorrhage
                                            Infection/sepsis
                                            Organ injury/perforation
                                            Pneumothorax
                                            Pulmonary embolus
                                            Arrhythmia
                                            Hemodynamic collapse

                     Pain score             1                                       1                           Procedure dependent

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common

                     Associated             Fluid collections: Patients may present with fever, sepsis, pain, or ileus. Mass effect, such as
                       conditions           with empyema or pericardial effusion, may also affect respiratory or cardiovascular function.
                                            Instrumentation or relief of mass effect may induce a vasovagal response or acute bacteremia and
                                            sepsis. Some infections (echinococcus, entamoeba, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
                                            [MRSA], vancomycin-resistant enterococci [VRE]) may require special precautions, such as respira-
                                            tory isolation, gown/glove standards, and pre- and postprocedure equipment sterilization.
                                            Solid tumors: Mass effect may result in obstruction of airways, blood vessels, GI/biliary tract,
                                            or urinary tract, or neural impingement. HTN may be seen with significant renal compression and,
                                            occasionally, with neuroendocrine tumors. Hematopoietic, hepatic, or renal compromise may result
                                            in coagulopathy or Plt dysfunction.
                                            Vascular pathologies: Aggressive anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet therapy may be used
                                            intraop. Restoration of arterial flow to kidneys may → rapid ↓ of renin production and BP. Interven-
                                            tional procedures for venous thrombosis can → PE. Placement of central vascular access cathe-
                                            ters can cause air embolism or cardiac arrhythmias from right atrial irritation. Sclerosis of vascular
                                            malformations may result in pulmonary embolism, acute pulmonary vasospasm, and hypertension.

                                                                                                                                                             Out-of-Operating Room

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                   Procedures

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The adult patient population requiring anesthesia for imaging is medically quite diverse; however, many have in com-
                   mon the inability or unwillingness to lie still during the procedure. Some of these patients are very ill, requiring the
                   services of an anesthesiologist to maintain cardiopulmonary stability. Adult patients should be npo for 6 h preproce-
                   dure (elective). In general, US and CT scans present fewer problems for the anesthesiologist than MRI. Regardless of
                   the method of anesthesia chosen, these patients must lie perfectly still, the airway must be protected, and IPPV may
                   be required. Thus, children, the cognitively challenged, and claustrophobic, uncooperative, or critically ill patients
                   may all require GA.

===== PAGE ? =====
1518   c h a p t e r 13.1    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Respiratory              As a result of limited access to the patient’s airway, the preop examination should
                                                             focus on the need for elective ET intubation to protect the airway. ET intubation and
                                                             mechanical ventilation also may be required in trauma patients, the critically ill, or
                                                             patients with GERD or sleep apnea. An LMA may be suitable for patients not at risk
                                                             of aspiration.

                                    Cardiovascular           Presence of a cardiac pacemaker or ICD is not a contraindication to MRI (see Safety Check-
                                                             list, Fig. 13.1-8). The presence of PA catheter thermistors or retained pacing wires and lead
                                                             fragments is a relative contraindication.

                                    Neurological             Patients with ↑ ICP or cranial trauma usually need GA with mechanical ventilation and
                                                             intubation. The presence of ferromagnetic aneurysm clips and/or coils may be a contrain-
                                                             dication to MRI (3 with surgeon or radiologist). Some aneurysm clips are nonferromag-
                                                             netic and are, therefore, MRI compatible.

                                    Musculoskeletal          The presence of spinal instrumentation, metal plates, pins, screws, joint replacements, or
                                                             other prostheses is usually not a contraindication to MRI.

                                    Premedication            Midazolam 1–5 mg iv (titrated to effect) may be appropriate in the very anxious adult
                                                             p
                                                              atient; alternatively, lorazepam 1–2 mg po/sl 1 h before procedure.

                                    CONSIDERATIONS FOR MRI/MRT
                                    The MRI/MRT suite poses many challenges to the anesthesiologist. Because of the intense magnetic fields involved in
                                    MRI, any equipment containing ferromagnetic components—such as ECG monitors, anesthesia machines—cannot
                                    go near the magnet. Thus, MRI-compatible equipment is mandatory in the area of the MRI scanner. The magnetic
                                    field will destroy information on credit card/access card magnetic strips and may damage pagers as well as mechani-
                                    cal devices, including wrist watches and infusion pump motors. (A microdrip infusion set is a suitable replacement
                                    for an infusion pump.)

                                    Noise                    May be very distressing for some patients and may average 95 dB in a 1.5–T scanner.
                                                             Exposure to noise levels of this magnitude should not exceed 2 h/d. Ear plugs or earphones
                                                             with music can be helpful.

                                    Thermal injury           Thermal injury is caused by induced currents in metal implants or in looped conductors in
                                                             contact with the skin.

                                    Projectile effect        The magnet has a strong attraction for ferromagnetic objects that can then become lethal
                                                             missiles; therefore, all objects, including pens, scissors, iv poles, O2 cylinders, keys, stetho-
                                                             scopes, and eyeglasses or jewelry containing ferrous materials must be removed prior to
                                                             entering the scanning room.

                                    Implanted/               There are several reports describing problems that may occur with cardiac pacemakers (see
                                      foreign                Safety Checklist, Fig. 13.1-8; failure to pace), aneurysm clips (hemorrhage), and intravas-
                                      material               cular wires (induced currents). Metal workers may be at special risk for ocular damage 2°
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             imbedded particles (see Safety Checklist, Fig. 13.1-8).
           Procedures

                                    Contrast agent           Currently, gadolinium chelates are the primary agents in use and have a higher safety mar-
                                                             gin than iodinated contrast agents. Adverse reactions, however, occur in ~2% of patients
                                                             and include HA, nausea, dizziness, hemodynamic instability, dysrhythmias, and nephro-
                                                             genic systemic fibrosis.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: Typically, iv/po sedation, often without the services of an anesthesiologist. Patients unwill-
                                    ing or unable to cooperate will require GA.

===== PAGE ? =====
Imaging and Image-Guided Procedures         1519

                   Section I – This section is to be filled out by the PATIENT:

                   The MRI room contains a very strong magnet. Before you go into the room, we must know if you have any metal in your body.
                   Please complete the following:
                   Pacemaker/Wires*                               ® Yes             ® No      Recent Stent             ® Yes            ® No
                                                                                              Placement
                   *If yes, radiology/cardiology staff must complete section III.
                   Aneurysm Clips                                 ® Yes             ® No      Shunt                    ® Yes            ® No
                   Surgical Clips                                 ® Yes             ® No      Ear Implant              ® Yes            ® No
                   Eye Implant                                    ® Yes             ® No      IUD                      ® Yes            ® No
                   Implantable Defibrillator                      ® Yes             ® No      Blood Vessel Coil        ® Yes            ® No
                   Bullets, Pellets, etc                          ® Yes             ® No      Heart Valve              ® Yes            ® No
                   Stimulator/Wires                               ® Yes             ® No      Artificial Limb          ® Yes            ® No
                   Infusion Pump                                  ® Yes             ® No      Cochlear Device          ® Yes            ® No
                   Penile Prosthesis                              ® Yes             ® No      Tracheostomy             ® Yes            ® No
                   Do you have kidney disease?                                                                         ® Yes            ® No
                   Have you ever been a machinist or metal worker?†                                                    ® Yes            ® No
                   Have you ever had a facial injury from metal?                                                       ® Yes            ® No
                   Have you ever had metal removed from your eyes?                                                     ® Yes            ® No
                   Are you pregnant? Last menstrual period                                                             ® Yes            ® No
                   Do you have any allergies? If yes, please specify                                                   ® Yes            ® No
                   Current medications:
                   Weight:

                   Section II – This section is to be filled out by the RADIOLOGY STAFF for all patients:

                   †Orbit Films                                   ® Yes             ® No
                   Anyone attending the patient in the MRI room has been cleared for MRI safety                        ® Yes            ® No
                   requirements.

                   Section III – This section is to be filled out by the RADIOLOGY/CARDIOLOGY STAFF for patients with implantable
                   cardiac devices:
                   Was the pacemaker or ICD generator implanted after 1998 or 2000, respectively?       ® Yes             ® No
                                                                                                        • If not, cancel MRI
                   Were the leads implanted ≥ 6 weeks before today?                                                    ® Yes             ® No
                                                                                                                       • If not, cancel MRI
                   Are non-transvenous epicardial or abandoned leads present? (Chest x-ray may be neces-               ® Yes             ® No
                   sary if device implantation records are unavailable)                                                • If yes, cancel MRI

                   ® Pacemaker   ® ICD
                   Dependent upon pacing?   ® Yes                                                           ® No
                                 • If yes, and the device is an ICD, cancel MRI                            • If not, program pacing to VVI/DDI
                                 • If yes, and the device is a pacemaker,                                  and deactivate tachycardia
                                             program pacing to VOO/DOO                                      detection and therapies
                   • Deactivate magnet, rate, PVC, noise, ventricular sense, and conducted atrial fibrillation response                                   Out-of-Operating Room
                   • Monitor blood pressure, ECG, oxygen saturation, and symptoms during MRI
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                   • Device Manufacturer &                    Prior to MRI                                          After MRI
                      model number:                 RA              RV               LV               RA                RV                LV
                   Sensing
                   Capture Threshold
                   Impedance
                   Battery Voltage
                   • Keep on ECG monitor after MRI until initial device programming has been restored
                   • Advise follow-up in device clinic in 3-6 months after MRI

                               Figure 13.1-8. MRI safety checklist. (From Nazarian S, Beinart R, Halperin HR:
                               Magnetic resonance imaging and implantable devices. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
                               2013 Apr; 6(2):419–28.)

===== PAGE ? =====
1520   c h a p t e r 13.1   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    IV sedation            In patients with a normal airway and no Hx of GERD, sedation can be carried out most
                                                           easily using a dexmedetomidine (1 mcg/kg loading dose over 10 min + 0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/h
                                                           infusion) or propofol infusion (25–100 mcg/kg/min), ±   midazolam (0.025–0.10 mg/kg)
                                                           titrated to effect.
                                                           *NB: Infusion pumps may be damaged by the magnet. (A microdrip infusion is a useful
                                                           alternative.)

                                    General anesthesia:

                                    Induction              Standard induction (see p. B-2) on an MRI gantry (typically in the magnet anteroom). The
                                                           anesthetized patient is then transported into the magnet.

                                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Most commonly, a propofol or dexmedetomidine infusion
                                                           provides satisfactory sedation for the procedure (see pump considerations, above). Because
                                                           continuous muscle relaxation is usually not required, spontaneous ventilation may be safest.

                                    Emergence              Emergence (and extubation) is often accomplished after the patient has been moved to the
                                                           adjacent anteroom, where additional airway and other support equipment are readily avail-
                                                           able. The patient should be recovered in the PACU, which may be some distance from the
                                                           MRI suite. Appropriate monitoring and personnel should accompany the patient.

                                    Blood and fluid        Usually no blood loss
                                       requirements        IV: 20 ga × 1
                                                           NS/LR @ TKO

                                    Monitoring             Standard monitors                 Monitoring in the MRI/MRT suite presents special
                                                           (see p. B-1)                      problems, discussed below.

                                    Monitoring, MRI        ECG                               ECG may be distorted by magnetic fields. Use MRI-com-
                                                                                             patible electrodes. Twist leads together to avoid creating
                                                                                             loops (↓ artifacts, ↓ burns). V5 and V6 are least likely to
                                                                                             develop artifacts.
                                                           Pulse oximetry                    MRI-compatible oximeters are available. Locate probe
                                                                                             outside bore of the magnet (e.g., toe). Avoid burn injury
                                                                                             2° induced current in looped leads.
                                                           BP (NIBP)                         Replace all ferrous connections on cuff and tubing with
                                                                                             nylon connectors. Use tubing extensions to keep appara-
                                                                                             tus away from the field.
                                                           ± Arterial line                   If an arterial line is medically indicated, keep the trans-
                                                                                             ducer close to the patient to avoid recording artifacts.
                                                                                             Use MRI-compatible transducers and connectors.
                                                                                             Recording equipment should have radiofrequency filters.
                                                           Precordial/esophageal             Often unsatisfactory because of magnet noise. An MRI-
                                                           stethoscope                       compatible, infrared, wireless stethoscope is available.
                                                           Temperature                       MRI-compatible T monitors are available, although usu-
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                                                             ally not necessary for adults (short procedure).
           Procedures

                                                           Capnography                       MRI-compatible capnographs are available. Long sample
                                                                                             lines will distort waveforms, and ETCO2 concentration
                                                                                             may not be accurate; however, this is still useful for mea-
                                                                                             suring RR and relative changes in ETCO2.
                                                           PA catheter                       PA catheters with thermistors or retained pacing wires
                                                                                             are contraindication to MRI.
                                                           Urinary catheter                  Catheters with T probes must be removed to avoid elec-
                                                                                             trical or burn hazards.
                                                           Verbal/visual                     The patient and the monitors may be viewed directly (in
                                                                                             procedure room) or through a screened window. Con-
                                                                                             tact should be maintained throughout the procedure.

                                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points         CT and MRI gantries may be poorly padded → potential
                                                           3 eyes                            nerve injury.

===== PAGE ? =====
Tracheobronchial Stenting          1521

                    Complications              Contrast related                       Gadolinium → local and systemic reactions (see Con-
                                                                                      trast-related complications, p. 1494).
                                               Loss of airway                         Patient must be promptly extracted from the magnet
                                                                                      bore and moved beyond the range of the magnet to
                                                                                      permit use of emergency intubation and resuscitation
                                                                                      equipment.
                                               Psychological                          Panic attacks and claustrophobia occur in 5–10% of
                                                                                      patients. Use of a blindfold may be helpful in selected
                                                                                      patients. Heavy sedation or even GA may be necessary.
                                               Hearing loss                           Temporary hearing loss and tinnitus may be expected in
                                                                                      40% of patients. Prevent by using ear plugs. GA: ↑ risk of
                                                                                      hearing damage 2° stapedius muscle relaxation.
                                               Thermal injury                         Results from induced current heating of oximeter probe,
                                                                                      and looping cables.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Hearing loss                                See discussion above.
                                               Thermal injury                              See discussion above.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bock M, Wacker FK: MR-guided intravascular interventions: techniques and applications. J Magn Reson Imaging 2008;
                        27:326–38.
                     2. Brown TR, Goldstein B, Little J: Severe burns resulting from magnetic resonance imaging with cardiopulmonary monitoring.
                        Risks and relevant safety precautions. Am J Phys Med Rehab 1993; 72:166–7.
                     3. Crute D, Sebeo J, Osborn IP: Neuroimaging for the anesthesiologist. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30(2):149–73.
                     4. Hasebroock KM, Serkova NJ: Toxicity of MRI and CT contrast agents. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2009; 5(4):403–16.
                     5. Hofer CK, Mizuguchi AK, Popescu WM: Monitoring the patient at risk of hemodynamic instability in remote locations. Int
                        Anesthsiol Clin 2012; 50(2):141–72.
                     6. Murphy KJ, Brunberg JA: Adult claustrophobia, anxiety, and sedation in magnetic resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging
                        1997; 15:51–4.
                     7. Nazarian S, Beinart R, Halperin HR: Magnetic resonance imaging and implantable devices. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
                        2013; 6(2):419-28.
                     8. Rahmathulla G, Recinos PF, Traul DE, et al: Surgical briefing, checklists, and the creation of an environment of safety in the
                        neurosurgical intraoperative magnetic imaging suite. Neurosurg Focus 2012; 33(5):E12.
                     9. Schulenburg E, Matta B: Anaesthesia for interventional neuroradiology. Curr Opin Anaesthsiol 2011; 24(4):426–32.
                    10. Veenith T, Coles JP: Anaesthesia for magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol
                        2011; 24(4):451–8.

                   Tracheobronchial Stenting                                                                                                                     Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                       Procedures

                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Tracheobronchial stenting may be performed for benign or malignant strictures of upper and lower
                   airways that are unsuitable either for surgical reconstruction or as a temporizing measure. Patients may not be
                   considered surgical candidates due to poor medical condition (e.g., comorbidity, recent thoracic surgery, limited
                   life span) or certain characteristics of the stricture (e.g., active disease, airway inflammation, extensive length, or
                   multifocality). The most common cause of tracheobronchial obstruction is bronchogenic carcinoma, with the lead-
                   ing benign cause being stricture secondary to prolonged intubation. Less common causes include radiation stenosis,
                   polychondritis, tracheomalacia, and, in children, extrinsic strictures 2° vascular malformations.
                   Since the first lung transplant in 1963, postsurgical bronchial stenosis has joined the list of indications for tracheo-
                   bronchial stenting. Bronchial stenosis is a relatively common complication of lung transplantation, occurring in
                   single-lung, double-lung, and heart/lung transplant recipients. It is believed that this complication is 2° the lack of

===== PAGE ? =====
1522   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    bronchial arterial supply, with resulting airway ischemia. These ischemic stenoses occur at the bronchial suture line
                                    and in the more distal airway and have been reported to occur in ~10% of patients following transplantation.
                                    Stent types: There are two primary types of airway stents: silicone-based and metallic, with both bare and covered
                                    metallic prostheses available.
                                    Silicone stents: Silicone-based stents (Silastic) are available both as straight, short tubes and as bifurcated Y-shaped
                                    devices. Straight stents are flanged on both ends to prevent dislodgement and can remain in place in patients for
                                    extended periods. The selection of the correct size and length is critical. The stent must be long enough to enable its
                                    flanges to anchor the stent within the stricture; short enough to avoid compromise of a lobar bronchus distally or the
                                    trachea proximally; and of satisfactory diameter to maintain the caliber of the airway. The main advantage of silicone
                                    stents is that they are easily removed, either when the patient’s ventilatory status has recovered sufficiently, or when
                                    reconstructive surgery is possible. In addition, the stent can be easily repositioned to obtain optimal placement.
                                    Bifurcated silicone stents are also available to accommodate the Y-shaped configuration of the carina with extension
                                    into the distal trachea and both mainstream bronchi.
                                    Silicone-based stents do have disadvantages. Stenotic airways need to be predilated before stent insertion, whereas
                                    metallic stents can be placed within a narrow airway lumen and subsequently dilated. Silicone stents frequently
                                    become occluded with mucus plugs and granulation tissue or tumor overgrowth; therefore, regular bronchoscopic
                                    examination and treatment are necessary to keep the airway clear. Silicone stents and covered metallic stents are
                                    more likely to migrate than bare stents due to lack of incorporation into the bronchial wall. In general, silicone stents
                                    must be placed under GA because of the need for rigid bronchoscopy.
                                    Metallic stents: The main advantages of metallic stents are the ease of insertion, an extremely thin wall that rap-
                                    idly becomes embedded in the airway, and the large gaps in the wall that allow normal ciliary function and reduced
                                    mucus impaction. The procedure can be performed using flexible bronchoscopy in the interventional room, under
                                    deep sedation. The main disadvantage of metallic stents is the difficulty in removing or repositioning these devices
                                    once deployed. Stents become firmly embedded in the wall of the airway and incorporated into the epithelium in < 6 wk.
                                    Removal can be accomplished by using forceps to grip the wall of the stent and applying a twisting motion to pull
                                    the stent away from the wall. Potential complications from this maneuver may be catastrophic and once these de-
                                    vices are placed they should be considered permanent. However, if removal becomes necessary the patient will
                                    require TIVA, muscle relaxants, and IPPV. Complications include tracheal/bronchial disruption, pulmonary artery in-
                                    jury, and pneumothorax and airway obstruction. Another problem associated with metallic stents is the development
                                    of granulation tissue either at the ends of the stents or through the interstices. This requires careful follow-up by repeat
                                    bronchoscopy and may require subsequent procedures, such as bronchoplasty, restenting, and laser tissue ablation.
                                    Because of the flexibility and low profile of the deployment systems used for metal stents, it is feasible to place them under
                                    conscious sedation; however, our practice is to utilize GA for tracheal stent placement to reduce patient movement due
                                    to the coughing that occurs with tracheal irritation. Most bronchial interventions can be performed without full GA.
                                    Insertion techniques: Silicone stents have low inherent radial force, and strictures need to be dilated before stenting.
                                    Rigid bronchoscopy is necessary to allow dilation and subsequent stent placement. Dilation can be performed with the
                                    Holinger bronchoscope, which is abutted to the stricture and advanced with a corkscrew motion. Gum-tipped Jack-
                                    son dilators and various angioplasty balloons also can be used. In patients with tracheal stomas, a T-tube stent can be
                                    inserted either via the stoma or the mouth. This extends up to the vocal cords and down as far as the carina. In patients
                                    without tracheal stomas, either Y-tubes or straight stents are inserted in a similar fashion. The stent is mounted on the
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    rigid scope, which is advanced across the stricture and then withdrawn, leaving the stent in place. A biopsy forcep is
                                    used to advance a limb of the Y-tube into the other bronchus. Placement of stents above the carina in this fashion is
           Procedures

                                    relatively straightforward, and the stents can be removed and repositioned until a satisfactory result is achieved. With
                                    more distal bronchial stents, the operator’s vision is somewhat obscured, and deployment is more difficult.
                                    For insertion of metallic stents, cross-sectional and fluoroscopic imaging is used to determine the optimal length
                                    and diameter of the stent. During the procedure, selective tracheobronchography may be performed by injecting
                                    water-soluble nonionic contrast through a catheter at the level of stricture. Flexible bronchoscopy helps guide the stent
                                    placement with a soft-tipped guidewire being advanced through either the scope or the ETT into the distal airway. In
                                    the rare case where the stricture is too narrow and tight to allow passage of a small, flexible bronchoscope, the guide-
                                    wire is passed, and the lesion is stented based on fluoroscopy, reconstructed CT images, or bronchography. Using
                                    fluoroscopy, the stent is positioned across the stricture and visually confirmed with bronchoscopy after deployment.
                                    For tracheal stenosis, care must be taken during intubation, as the stricture often is close to the vocal cord.
                                    Usual preop diagnosis: Bronchial compression 2° carcinoma; posttransplantation; relapsing polychondritis;
                                    sarcoidosis

===== PAGE ? =====
Tracheobronchial Stenting     1523

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position              Supine

                     Incision              None

                     Special               Bronchoscope (flexible or rigid); self-expanding metallic stent (covered and uncovered); balloon-
                       instrumentation     expandable, short metallic stent

                     Unique                May have to pull the end of the tracheal tube back to the level of the vocal cords to adequately
                       considerations      treat the entire trachea. Alternatively can stent through LMA.

                     Antibiotics           Not usually administered.

                     Procedure time        1–2 h

                     EBL                   0

                     Postop care           ICU or step-down unit

                     Mortality             1–5%

                     Morbidity             Tracheobronchial irritation (usually temporary)
                                           Stent malposition → bronchial occlusion or vocal-cord paralysis

                     Pain score            2–4 (first few hours only)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Respiratory compromise due to airway obstruction may pose a significant management challenge. It is therefore
                   somewhat controversial and highly institution-dependent, whether these procedures should be performed outside
                   of the OR. A thorough preoperative workup is necessary before anesthesia. The majority of patients present for pal-
                   liation of an obstructing pulmonary malignancy or treatment of granulation tissue obstruction of lung transplant
                   anastomosis. Some may present emergently with impending airway obstruction that precludes a complete preop-
                   erative workup. The choice of anesthesia is primarily a function of the type of stent, surgeon preference, and the
                   comorbid conditions of the patient. In general, silicone stent placement, which requires airway dilation with rigid
                   bronchoscopy, will necessitate GA. Metallic stents can be placed without the need for preceding airway dilation;
                   therefore, either topical anesthesia, with or without conscious sedation, or GA can be used. Immediate improve-
                   ments in FEV1, FVC, and PEF can be expected after stenting of an obstructed tracheobronchial segment.

                    Respiratory             Patients with upper or lower airway stricture may present with cough, stridor, dyspnea, and
                                            fatigue. Airway obstruction can be classified as dynamic or fixed, depending on whether the
                                            obstruction varies with the respiratory cycle. Stridor that worsens during inspiration sug-
                                            gests an extrathoracic dynamic obstruction, whereas expiratory stridor is associated with
                                            intrathoracic dynamic obstruction. Other physical findings may include bronchospasm (in
                                                                                                                                                       Out-of-Operating Room
                                            COPD patients), clubbing, or cyanosis. Preop fiberoptic bronchoscopic examination and/or
                                                                                                                                                             Procedures

                                            high-resolution, thin-section CT scans will help to define the location, size, and extent of the
                                            obstruction. In patients suspected of having tracheomalacia, scans are performed at maxi-
                                            mal inspiration and maximal expiration to unmask subtle areas of narrowing exacerbated by
                                            ↑  intrathoracic pressure on inspiration. Using this information, the appropriate size for an
                                            ETT can be estimated and potential problems with tracheal intubation can be anticipated.
                                            Tests: CXR; PFTs with flow/volume loops (see Fig. 5-14 in Anesthetic Considerations for
                                            Mediastinoscopy, p. 335); CT scans preferably with three-dimensional reconstructions.

                    Cardiovascular          Directed at any underlying disease process. Restoration of intravascular volume before
                                            induction of GA is important in patients with hypovolemia 2° chronic malnutrition from
                                            malignancy.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE ? =====
1524   c h a p t e r 13.1    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Musculoskeletal          Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic syndrome (Eaton-Lambert) with ↑ resis-
                                                             tance to depolarizing muscle relaxants and ↑  sensitivity to NDMRs. Post–lung transplant
                                                             patients on certain immunosuppressive therapies (e.g., cyclosporine) may have prolonged
                                                             muscle blockade from NDMRs.

                                    Hematologic              Blood cross-match not necessary unless high risk of hemorrhage from injury (e.g., rigid
                                                             bronchoscopy used in patients with friable tumors). Maintaining adequate O2-carrying
                                                             capacity is important in patients with poor pulmonary reserve.
                                                             Tests: CBC; others as indicated from H&P

                                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                    Premedication            Patients in respiratory distress are extremely anxious; however, anxiolysis has to be bal-
                                                             anced against the risk of impending respiratory arrest in some patients. Careful titration of
                                                             anxiolytic medications is necessary to avoid oversedation. An antisialagogue (e.g., glyco-
                                                             pyrrolate 0.2 mg iv) will help minimize secretions and improve visualization through the
                                                             bronchoscope. Post–lung transplant patients may be steroid dependent and stress-dose
                                                             steroid supplement may be required.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: Be prepared for an airway emergency. Preparations should be made for emergency rigid
                                    bronchoscopy and/or tracheostomy below the lesion. A variety of laryngoscope blades and ETTs of all sizes,
                                    including small, uncuffed (5–6 mm) tubes, should be readily available. Endoscopic evaluation of the airway must be
                                    performed in a spontaneously breathing patient if the airway lesion has not been defined. Muscle relaxation must
                                    be avoided until a detailed examination is completed and the operator is certain an airway can be maintained subse-
                                    quently. Vocal cord paralysis, which can mimic tracheal stenosis, can be obscured by muscle relaxation.

                                    Topical                  Anesthetize palate, pharynx, larynx, vocal cords, and trachea with lidocaine (2–4%), using
                                      anesthesia             atomizer (e.g., MADgic™ Atomizer) or having the patient gargle viscous lidocaine (4%). Avoid
                                                             local anesthetic overdose.

                                    Conscious                Midazolam will increase the seizure threshold in the setting of relative local anesthetic
                                      sedation               overdose. Other options include dexmedetomidine (0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/h after loading dose)
                                                             and propofol (10–100 mcg/kg/min), with or without a short-acting opioid (e.g., fentanyl
                                                             25–50 mcg; remifentanil 0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/min). Caution should be exercised when mixing
                                                             opioids and sedatives to avoid respiratory depression.

                                    Induction                Patients should be well preoxygenated. Patients may be unable to lie flat 2° respiratory
                                                             distress. Low-density helium-oxygen mixtures (Heliox) reduce airflow resistance past the
                                                             obstruction, which may be beneficial in optimizing the patient. Ideally spontaneous venti-
                                                             lation should be maintained until the airway is secured. Inhaled sevoflurane, intravenous
                                                             ketamine, judicious propofol (without opioid), or awake FOB with topical anesthesia is
                                                             appropriate. Optimally, the ETT is positioned ~1 cm above the lesion. Flexible bronchosco-
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             py of the distal airways is then performed through the stricture, and the distal extent of the
           Procedures

                                                             stricture relative to the carina is identified. In patients with a stricture near the vocal cords,
                                                             the use of an LMA is a viable option, as it avoids passing an airway through the lesion and
                                                             offers the ability to bronchoscopically examine the entire lesion. Avoid muscle relaxation
                                                             if possible; if necessary, consider small dose of succinylcholine (in the future: rocuronium-
                                                             sugammadex). Distal or mild airway stenoses may be appropriately managed with an RSI.

                                    Maintenance              Inhalational anesthesia is unreliable in most cases due to the limited ventilation with a
                                                             bronchoscope in situ (resistance and leak). TIVA is preferable: use propofol (50–100 mcg/
                                                             kg/min) and remifentanil (0.05–0.2 mcg/kg/min) infusions. Once the airway is secured,
                                                             muscle relaxation can be given to avoid movement or coughing during the procedure. Suc-
                                                             cinylcholine drip (0.25–1 g/250 mL NS, titrated to twitch suppression; avoid phase II block
                                                             by keeping dose < 5–6 mg/kg), or intermediate-acting (cisatracurium 0.1 mg iv, vecuronium
                                                             0.1 mg/kg iv, rocuronium 0.15–0.3 mg/kg iv) muscle relaxant may be used. Manual IPPV

===== PAGE ? =====
Tracheobronchial Stenting      1525

                    Maintenance        through side-arm of rigid bronchoscope or via the swivel connector if fiberoptic broncho-
                      (cont'd)         scope is used. High-flow (up to 20 L/min) O2 or O2 flush (barotrauma risk) may be required
                                       to compensate for leak if rigid bronchoscope is used. Hyperventilate patient in preparation
                                       for periods of apnea. Low-frequency jet ventilation (50 psi at 10/min with I:E 1:2–4) via a
                                       Sander’s injector is an alternative. Barotrauma and dynamic lung hyperinflation are poten-
                                       tial problems with this approach.

                    Emergence          Patient must be fully awake before extubation with no residual neuromuscular blockade.
                                       Emergence can be “stormy.” Patient may cough violently to clear secretions and blood.
                                       Wake-up on low-dose (e.g. 0-0.5 mcg/kg/min) remifentanil infusion tends to be smoother;
                                       consider airway suctioning and lidocaine (1 mg/kg iv) to decrease airway reactivity. Postop
                                       O2 supplementation (preferably humidified).

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 18 ga × 1                Transfusion unnecessary except to optimize O2-carrying
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h          capacity or to treat hemorrhage.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see       ETCO2 not accurate during rigid bronchoscopy
                                       p. B-1)                      Depending on patient’s comorbidities.
                                       ± Arterial line

                    Positioning        Supine
                                       3 and pad pressure points
                                       3 eyes

                    Complications      Hypoxemia                    Suction secretions/blood; airway instrumentation may have
                                                                    to be interrupted and bronchoscope removed to improve
                                                                    oxygenation and ventilation.
                                       Hypercarbia                  Commonly 2° inadequate ventilation. May cause increased
                                                                    sympathetic drive with 2° hypertension/tachycardia/dys-
                                                                    rhythmias. Simply↑ TV and RR.
                                       Hypertension                 Ensure adequate ventilation and sedative/anesthesia.
                                       Bronchospasm                 Rx: bronchodilator (e.g., albuterol puff )
                                       Stent dislodgement           From coughing or movement. Ensure adequate anesthesia
                                                                    and muscle relaxation.
                                       Bleeding                     More likely with rigid bronchoscope.
                                       Tracheobronchial injury      Requires frequent suctioning. Major hemorrhage may
                                       Aspiration of debris         require thoracotomy using DLT or BB to isolate and/or tam-
                                                                    ponade bleeding site. Transfusion.
                                                                    Patient may need to be kept intubated after the procedure.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications      Airway edema                 Rx with corticosteroids (dexamethasone 10 mg iv) and/or
                                                                    racemic epinephrine nebulizer. Impending airway obstruc-
                                                                     tion will require reintubation.                                         Out-of-Operating Room
                                       Airway obstruction            May be catastrophic. Secretion retention or stent dislodge-
                                                                                                                                                   Procedures

                                                                     ment. Rigorous suction. Reintubation or restenting.
                                       Stent fracture/migration      May be catastrophic. May require emergent reintubation or
                                                                    restenting.
                                       Pneumothorax                 Obtain CXR. May require chest tube placement if > 20%.
                                       Secretion retention          Humidified O2

                    Pain               None
                      management

===== PAGE ? =====
1526   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Abdelmalak BB, Gildea TR, Doyle DJ: Anesthesia for bronchoscopy. Curr Pharm Des 2012; 18(38):6314–24.
                                      2. Doyle DJ, Abdelmalak B, Machuzak M, Gildea TR: Anesthesia and airway management for removing pulmonary self-
                                         expanding metallic stents. J Clin Anesth 2009; 21(7):529–32.
                                      3. Lund MD, Garland R, Ernst A: Airway stenting: applications and practice management considerations. Chest 2007; 131(2):579–87.
                                      4. McGrath EE, Warriner D, Anderson P: The insertion of self expanding metal stents with flexible bronchoscopy under sedation
                                         for malignant tracheobronchial stenosis: a single-center retrospective analysis. Arch Bronconeumol 2012; 48(2):43–8.
                                      5. Ochroch EA: Pro: laser endobronchial treatment does not need to occur in the operating room. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
                                         2005; 19(1):118–20.
                                      6. Profili S, Manca A, Feo CF, et al: Palliative airway stenting performed under radiological guidance and local anesthesia.
                                         Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2007; 30(1):74–8.
                                      7. Vaitkeviciute I, Ehrenwerth J: Con: bronchial stenting and laser airway surgery should not take place outside the operating
                                         room. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005; 19(1):121–2.

                                    Radiofrequency Ablation of Tumors

                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was pioneered in 1920 by Harvey Cushing for the creation of small
                                    lesions within the CNS. Since then, the technique has been refined so that precise control of lesion size can be
                                    achieved by measuring the temperature and electrical resistance within the tissues being treated. Ablating neural tis-
                                    sue with RF is successful in treating pain from trigeminal neuralgia, facet osteoarthritis, and failed-back syndrome.
                                    RFA has expanded treatment options for certain solid organ tumors, including hepatocellular carcinomas, colorectal
                                    metastasis to the liver, primary and secondary lung cancers, renal cell carcinoma, and painful bone lesions. Because
                                    RFA is most often done percutaneously, it is well suited for the treatment of primary and secondary malignancies in
                                    the liver, as well as other sites in patients who are not suitable for open surgery.
                                    Mechanism of tissue destruction: In RFA, an alternating current operating in the frequency of radio waves (460–
                                    480 kHz) is emitted from the tip of an electrode or needle placed directly into tissues. This alternating current causes
                                    the local ions to vibrate, producing heat and inducing cell death by coagulative necrosis. The cytotoxic T threshold
                                    is 50°C; however, with RFA, temperatures can exceed this and actually reach the boiling point of water (100°C). A
                                    limitation of RFA is the small lesion size it creates. Recent technical advances in RF systems have improved such that
                                    lesions > 5 cm in diameter can be created.
                                    Techniques of radiofrequency ablation: Grounding pads are placed on the patient’s thighs; if a single RF treat-
                                    ment probe is used, at least two and, preferably, four pads (96 cm2 surface area each) or the equivalent (minimum
                                    total surface area = ~200 cm2 ) must be used. If a three-probe cluster is used, at least four RF grounding pads or their
                                    equivalent (~400 cm2 surface area) must be used. Presently available commercial generators usually require four
                                    grounding pads. The grounding pads and the treatment probes are connected to the RF generator. When the genera-
                                    tor is activated, current flows between the conductive electrode tip and the grounding pads (or “dispersive electrode”).
                                    The increase in the tissue T is proportional to the current density. Because the density is highest near the conductive
                                    electrode tip, coagulation is induced in the tissue surrounding the treatment probe. The linear extent (depth) of the
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    resulting coagulation is determined by the length of the uninsulated probe tip, while the diameter of coagulation
           Procedures

                                    necrosis produced around the probe tip depends on the duration of treatment. Based on our experience using perfu-
                                    sion probes and pulsed current technique, areas of the tissue up to 4.5 cm diameter may be coagulated with a single
                                    probe and up to 7.3 cm in diameter with clustered probes.
                                    The lesion to be treated is identified and characterized by ultrasound or CT, which is used to guide the RF probe to
                                    the distal margin of the lesion. The generator is activated, and output is gradually increased to a predetermined maxi-
                                    mum, based on tip exposure and probe configuration (single vs. clustered probes). Maximum power (90–120 watts)
                                    is applied to the treatment probe cluster until tissue impedance rises. At this point, the power is turned off for 60 sec,
                                    then increased to maximum until once again impedance is seen to rise. Ultrasound monitoring of the RF site may be
                                    carried out throughout the ablation; however, it usually is limited due to the production of tissue water vapor that
                                    interferes with the transmission of the sound waves. CT can be used occasionally to check the stable position of the
                                    needle. Final tissue temperatures usually range from 60°C to 90°C.

===== PAGE ? =====
Radiofrequency Ablation of Tumors       1527

                   Lesion size varies according to the size of the electrode, the current, duration of the treatment, and local blood flow.
                   Tumor cells adjacent to large blood vessels may not be treated thoroughly due to the heat-sink effect of flowing blood,
                   which carries away the RF energy as fast as it is deposited. Alternatively, cirrhotic livers with extensive fibrosis and ↓
                   blood flow may need fewer treatments because of increased conduction through the tumor compared to surrounding
                   tissue, a phenomenon termed the “oven effect” that helps achieve larger coagulation diameters.
                   Liver RF: The most well-known and best-studied application of RF is in the treatment of primary and metastatic liver
                   tumors. RF has been used widely to treat HCC as well as metastases. Prospective and retrospective studies have demon-
                   strated that complete necrosis can be achieved in 90% of tumors measuring < 3 cm in fewer than two sessions. However,
                   the success rate drops markedly in tumors measuring > 3.5 cm, with complete necrosis achieved in < 50% at two sessions.
                   Lung RF: Recently, RF energy has been used for ablation of certain primary and secondary lung tumors. The work
                   that has been done to date has been performed in patients whose disease extent offers few therapeutic options. The
                   results have been encouraging and there has been a satisfying lack of major complications reported. Pneumothorax
                   is seen in ~30% of cases (similar to rates reported during lung biopsy); and although transcranial Doppler has dem-
                   onstrated microbubbles in the cerebral vasculature during ablation, there have been no reported sequelae. The same
                   basic technique is used, although lower energies are applied, because there is less solid tissue in the lung, and high
                   levels of impedance are reached sooner.
                   Bone RF: RF has been applied to both benign and malignant bone tumors. The first use was for the thermocoagula-
                   tion of small, painful, osteoid osteomas. The pain in an osteoid osteoma is related to prostaglandin production within
                   the cells of the small, central, vascularized tumor nidus. Pain relief is obtained only after complete removal of the
                   nidus, surgically or percutaneously. Surgical removal requires cortical osteotomy and a hospital stay. Recently, RF has
                   emerged as the method of choice for treating osteoid osteoma. The ablation is done percutaneously, usually under
                   CT guidance as an outpatient procedure. The nidus is located, and a single-tip RF electrode is placed in the nidus.
                   Because the area of treatment is almost always < 1 cm, larger, multitined electrodes are not required. Energy required
                   to destroy the nidus is minimal. Patients typically have 1–2 d of postprocedure pain that differs from the pain of oste-
                   oid osteoma. Relief of the osteoid osteoma pain almost always occurs within the first 24–48 h. Cure with one session
                   can be as high as 90%, and retreatment can be performed if the first treatment is not immediately successful or if the
                   patient’s pain returns in the future.
                   Preliminary studies in malignant bone tumor treatment with RF show promise. Previously irradiated foci of tumor,
                   whether primary or metastatic, that are still biologically active can be treated locally with internally cooled RF elec-
                   trodes. Local pain control in painful bone metastases and control of hemorrhage in both the axial and appendicular
                   skeletons have responded well to RF ablation. In areas where tumor abuts vital structures, such as the spinal cord, RF
                   may not be effective because local thermal injury may not be desirable. However, spinal RF can be performed in the
                   vertebral body when the cortex between the electrode and the spinal canal is intact.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Primary or metastatic hepatic malignancy; primary or metastatic pulmonary malignancy;
                   osteoid osteoma.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine or prone

                     Incision                Over the site to be accessed

                     Special                 RFA probes and generator                                                                                   Out-of-Operating Room
                       instrumentation
                                                                                                                                                              Procedures

                     Unique                  Mild ↑ T during procedure; ↑ pain as ablation continues.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             None usually; occasionally, ciprofloxacin 500 mg iv

                     Procedure time          2–4 h

                     EBL                     None

                     Postop care             Step-down unit

                     Mortality               < 5%

===== PAGE ? =====
1528   c h a p t e r 13.1    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                     Morbidity              Postprocedure pain at site
                                                            Hepatic hemorrhage: Rare, due to cauterizing nature of procedure
                                                            Pneumothorax (during hepatic dome lesion ablation, pulmonary ablation)
                                                            Hepatic abscess (↑ incidence in patients with previous biliary manipulation)

                                     Pain score             5–8 (first few hours only)

                                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                     Age range              Adults

                                     Male:Female            M>F

                                     Incidence              Uncommon

                                     Etiology               Pain (trigeminal neuralgia; facet osteoarthritis; metastatic cancer); primary malignancies

                                     Associated             Lung cancer; cancers of the neck; polychondritis; prolonged ICU stay; lung transplantation
                                       conditions

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Patients presenting for RF ablation range from those with end-stage lung cancer to otherwise healthy chronic pain
                                    patients. In addition, analgesic/anesthetic requirements are highly variable, depending on the size and location of
                                    the target lesions. Close communication between the various care providers is essential to achieving a positive
                                    outcome.

                                    Respiratory              Access to the airway may be limited in the typical interventional radiology suite; thus,
                                                             a patient with a potentially difficult airway may require elective intubation. Appropri-
                                                             ate airway adjuncts (LMAs, light wand, fiberoptic cart, etc.) should be readily available.
                                                             I ntraop risks include the possibility of pneumothorax, so needle decompression supplies
                                                             also should be available. Lung cancer patients presenting for tumor ablation may have com-
                                                             promised pulmonary function and require objective assessment of pathophysiology with
                                                              PFTs and/or ABG analysis.
                                                              Tests: PFTs, ABG, as indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular           HTN and CHF are seen frequently in elderly patients presenting for RF procedures. These
                                                             patients often have a severe disease process, which may be complicated by other signifi-
                                                             cant comorbidities. The potential for cardiac ischemia should be evaluated carefully. Preop
                                                             beta-blockade and antihypertensive therapy may be required.
                                                             Tests: ECG, ECHO, noninvasive stress testing as indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological             A thorough neurological exam is important to document neurological deficits that are
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             present before the procedure.
           Procedures

                                    Hepatic                  Patients may have coagulation defects and mental status changes 2° systemic liver disease.
                                                             The potential for severe hemorrhage from vascular injury, the risk of aspiration, and the
                                                             lack of cooperation (encephalopathy) should all be taken into account when planning the
                                                             anesthesia. Patients with severe liver disease also may exhibit hepatopulmonary or hepa-
                                                             torenal syndrome manifested as hypoxemia or renal failure. Consider the need for preop
                                                             correction of coagulation and fluid status.
                                                             Tests: LFTs; ammonia; INR

                                    Endocrine                The possibility of endocrine and metabolic derangements should be assessed. Lung cancer
                                                             patients may have electrolyte problems 2° SIADH, whereas patients with liver disease are
                                                             prone to developing hypoglycemia.
                                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE ? =====
Radiofrequency Ablation of Tumors       1529

                    Hematologic             Consider the possibility of chronic anemia or hypercoagulability 2° neoplastic disease.
                                            Chemotherapy or systemic disease may have depressed bone marrow function and altered
                                            the activity of WBCs and Plts.
                                            Tests: Hct, Plt count, or CBC, as indicated by H&P

                    Premedication           Sedation must be adjusted according to patient requirements. Small doses of midazolam,
                                            titrated to minimal sedation, are most reasonable (0.5–1 mg increments). Patients with
                                            end-stage disease often require very little premedication.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Sedation or GA, depending on the size and location of lesions. Most ablations are well toler-
                   ated with MAC; however, large lesions may require GA. The out-of-OR site often involves working in cramped quar-
                   ters with poor access to anesthesia equipment. Nevertheless, the ASA standards of monitoring should be followed.
                   MAC: MAC cases are performed with fentanyl (25–150 mcg) and midazolam (0.5–2 mg) boluses, combined with a
                   propofol infusion (25–100 mcg/kg/min). The substitution of remifentanil (0.02–0.1 mcg/kg/min) for fentanyl allows
                   rapid titration of analgesia for the brief periods of intense stimulation.

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2), preceding placement of an ETT or LMA.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Because procedures are of an unpredictable duration,
                                            short-acting muscle relaxants (e.g., rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg) are advised. Propofol
                                             (25–100 mcg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.02–0.1 mcg/kg/min) are an appropriate
                                            c ombination that easily can be titrated to effect. Persistent intraop HTN may be treated
                                             with labetalol (5–25 mg) or hydralazine (5–20 mg).

                    Emergence               Standard emergence (see p. B-4). Short-acting analgesics (e.g., fentanyl 25–150 mcg)
                                            should be used in outpatients. Prophylactic treatment with antiemetics (ondansetron
                                            4 mg iv) may be beneficial because there is a high incidence of PONV.

                    Blood and fluid         IV: 20–14 ga × 1–2                    Larger access needed for hepatic lesions.
                       requirements         NS/LR: 3–5 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1)
                                            ± Arterial line
                                            ±  Urinary catheter                   Foley for longer procedures (> 2 h)

                    Positioning             3 and pad pressure points             Radiology tables often poorly padded.
                                            3 eyes

                    Complications           Hemorrhage                            Blood or colloid should be readily available, if the
                                                                                  need is anticipated. Large retroperitoneal hemor-
                                                                                  rhage can develop, yet not be appreciated until
                                                                                  blood loss is extensive.
                                            Pneumothorax                          Needle decompression and/or thoracostomy tube                  Out-of-Operating Room
                                            Hemothorax                            placement may be necessary during thoracic or
                                                                                                                                                       Procedures

                                                                                  high hepatic procedures.
                                            Electrical shock                      Electrocautery devices can produce serious injury if
                                            Thermal injury                        not properly grounded.
                                            Hyperthermia                          Patients may develop rapid T increases 2° direct
                                                                                  heating of large lesions.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications           PONV                                  Common.
                                            Hemorrhage                            Occult blood loss may continue for several h after
                                                                                  the procedure is terminated.

===== PAGE ? =====
1530   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                    Pain                        Standard pain management (see              Postprocedure pain is usually well tolerated.
                                      management                p. C-2)

                                    Tests                       Postprocedure HCT, as indicated.

                                    Suggested Readings
                                      1. Ahmed M, Brace Cl, Lee FT Jr, Goldberg SN: Principles of and advances in percutaneous ablation. Radiology 2011;
                                         258(2):351–69.
                                      2. Carrafiello G, Mangini M, Fontana F, et al: Complications of microwave and radiofrequency lung ablation: personal experience
                                         and review of the literature. Radiol Med 2012; 117(2):201–13.
                                      3. Lencioni R, Crocetti L: Image-guided ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Recent Results Cancer Res 2013; 190:181–94.
                                      4. Livraghi T, Goldberg SN, Lazzaroni S, et al: Hepatocellular carcinoma: radio-frequency ablation of medium and large lesions.
                                         Radiology 2000; 214(3):761–8.
                                      5. Rhim H, Yoon KH, Lee JM, et al: Major complications after radio-frequency thermal ablation of hepatic tumors: spectrum of
                                         imaging findings. Radiographics 2003; 23(l):123–34.
                                      6. Salas N, Castle SM, Leveillee RJ: Radiofrequency ablation for treatment of renal tumors: technological principles and
                                         outcomes. Expert Rev Med Devices 2011; 8(6):695–707.

                                    Irreversible Electroporation (IRE Ablation)
                                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Description: Electroporation describes a method of exposing cells to ultra-short high-voltage electrical pulses to
                                    create temporary or permanent pores in the membrane. The temporary version takes advantage of a momentary
                                    increase in cell permeability to facilitate the delivery of genes and macromolecules such as antibodies, RNA, DNA,
                                    drugs, dyes, and tracers into cells. This “reversible” process has been in clinical use for years and is a common method
                                    of treating some cancers. Researchers discovered that with higher electrical voltages, permanent pores could be
                                    created, resulting in disruption of cell homeostasis and apoptotic cell death. This process is known as irreversible
                                    electroporation (IRE) and has recently emerged as a minimally invasive tissue ablation method. IRE presents several
                                    advantages to the traditional temperature-based ablation methods (i.e., radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation).
                                    Because IRE uses nonthermal energy, it avoids the issue of undesirable thermal damage to surrounding tissues. It also
                                    has the advantage in that it can be applied to areas of high perfusion (e.g., within vicinity of blood vessels) without
                                    concern for the heat-sink effect. IRE is able to induce cell death in a selective, well-defined manner and has been
                                    shown to preserve extracellular structures including blood vessels, connective tissues, and nerves. The procedure
                                    time for IRE is substantially shorter than conventional ablative therapies. The current IRE system has the capability
                                    of using up to 6 probes simultaneously, which has been useful in ablating larger lesions with short procedure times.
                                    IRE is well suited as a treatment option for malignancies in difficult-to-treat areas where there is a need to preserve
                                    large blood vessels or other vital structures.
                                    Mechanism of tissue destruction: IRE utilizes high-voltage pulses ranging from 1000 to 3000 v/cm to create
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    an electric field across the tissue between electrodes. Therefore, the shape and size of the IRE ablation field can be
           Procedures

                                    manipulated to include the entire area to be ablated. The intensity of the electric field within a given tissue is dictated
                                    by the distance between the electrodes and the voltage difference across the electrodes. The creation of permanent
                                    nanopores in the cell membrane irreversibly impairs the cell’s ability to maintain homeostasis, resulting in cell death
                                    via apoptosis. Apoptosis is a natural, tightly regulated process in which cells are phagocytized by immune cells and
                                    then replaced by innate cellular regeneration. This process results in minimal damage to surrounding tissues with
                                    minimal fibrosis and scarring. Although the major mechanism of tissue ablation in IRE is electroporation, thermal
                                    tissue damage is possible if excessive electric fields are applied. Every electrical field produces thermal energy, which
                                    is referred to as the joule effect. If the parameters of IRE are not chosen correctly, the electrical field generated can
                                    cause thermal damage, negating the nonthermal advantages of this therapy.
                                    Techniques of irreversible electroporation: Precise planning is necessary before beginning IRE treatment
                                    to determine the proper placement of electrodes that will achieve the desired outcome. Preablation computerized
                                    tomography (CT) data from 3D mapping of the treatment site are very useful. The NanoKnife™ system comes with a

===== PAGE ? =====
Irreversible Electroporation (IRE Ablation)      1531

                   computerized preablation planning program that helps clinicians determine the number and placement of electrodes
                   needed for the ablation zone. The voltage setting is determined by the distance between each pair of electrodes with the
                   purpose of generating at least 1000 V/cm between them. The number of electrodes used depends on the site and volume
                   of the target area and ease of electrode access. Current flow is determined by tissue resistance and degree of IRE achieved.
                   With the patient anesthetized, electrodes are placed in a predetermined grid pattern in the target area under ultra-
                   sound or CT guidance. Typically 90 pulses of high-voltage (1.5–3 kV) direct current between 20 and 50 A are deliv-
                   ered in groups of 10, at intervals of 70 µs (bipolar) or 100 µs (unipolar). At 2-cm probe spacing and 3 kV delivered,
                   the maximum effective treatment area is 2 cm diameter from each probe (maximum of 4 cm total ablation distance);
                   beyond that the ablation cross-section becomes less effective. Like any other ablation methods, probes have to be
                   repositioned to accommodate large tumors or many small tumors.
                   Pancreas IRE: IRE has been shown to be successful in managing surgically unresectable pancreatic tumors encasing
                   the celiac and superior mesenteric vessels.
                   Liver IRE: Clinical IRE was first attempted in patients diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) with prom-
                   ising clinical results. Liver function tests were normal at 24 h and at 1, 3, and 6 mo postop. There was, however, an
                   expected increase in alanine aminotransferase, a marker for acute hepatocyte damage. Most patients with increased
                   levels will return to baseline levels after 1 month.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Most centers perform IRE on primary or metastatic malignancies in the liver, kidney,
                   lung, prostate, and pancreas.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine or prone

                     Incision                Over the site to be accessed determined by preop CT or US

                     Special                 AngioDynamics IRE electrodes and NanoKnife IRE generator
                       instrumentation

                      Unique                 Stimulation of skeletal muscles and diaphragm (minimized by the use of muscle relaxants
                        considerations       ↑ cardiac dysrhythmias
                                             ↓ T during lengthy procedures in CT room

                     Antibiotics             None usually; if needed, ciprofloxacin 500 mg iv and/or Flagyl 500 mg iv

                     Procedure time          1–2 h

                     EBL                     Usually minimal (although large-volume blood loss may occur during ablation of liver tumors)

                     Postop care             PACU then step-down posttreatment unit

                     Mortality               < 5%

                     Morbidity               Postprocedure pain at site
                                             Brachial plexus injury (during positioning for liver ablation)
                                             Pneumothorax (related to lung ablation, segment VIII, or dome liver ablation)
                                             Subcapsular hematoma (related to multiple needle punctures)                                                  Out-of-Operating Room
                                             Intraperitoneal hematoma (related to pancreas ablation)
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                     Pain score              3–8 (first few hours only)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Adults

                     Male:Female             50:50

                     Incidence               Uncommon

                     Etiology                Primary and metastatic tumors

                     Associated              Liver, lung, kidney, pancreas cancer
                       conditions

===== PAGE ? =====
1532   c h a p t e r 13.1    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    Anesthetic considerations for IRE are very similar to those for patients undergoing radiofrequency ablation.

                                    Respiratory              Lung cancer patients presenting for tumor ablation may have compromised pulmonary func-
                                                             tion and require objective assessment with PFTs and/or ABG analysis before the procedure.
                                                             Access to the airway may be limited in the CT scanning suite. Intraop risks include the pos-
                                                             sibility of pneumothorax.
                                                             Tests: PFTs, ABG, as indicated from H&P

                                    Cardiovascular           Patients with underlying cardiac disease are especially susceptible to IRE ablation-induced
                                                             dysrhythmias. A defibrillator should be available in the CT suite. The potential for myo-
                                                             cardial ischemia should be evaluated carefully. A cardiac anesthesiologist is not usually
                                                             required.  
                                                             Tests: ECG, ECHO, noninvasive stress testing as indicated from H&P

                                    Neurological             A thorough neurological exam is important to document preexisting neurological deficits.

                                    Hepatic                  Patients may have coagulation defects and mental status changes related to liver disease.
                                                             Patients with severe liver disease may exhibit a hepatopulmonary or hepatorenal syndrome
                                                             manifested as hypoxia or renal failure. Consider the need for preop correction of coagula-
                                                             tion and fluid status.
                                                             Tests: LFTs; ammonia; INR

                                    Endocrine                The possibility of endocrine and metabolic derangements should be assessed. Lung cancer
                                                             patients may have electrolyte problems 2° SIADH, while patients with liver disease are
                                                             prone to developing hypoglycemia.
                                                             Tests: As indicated by H&P

                                    Hematologic              Consider the possibility of chronic anemia or hypercoagulability 2° neoplastic disease.
                                                             Chemotherapy or systemic disease may have depressed bone marrow function and altered
                                                             the activity of wbcs and platelets.

                                    Premedication            Consider midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv.  Patients with end-stage disease often require very little
                                                             premedication

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                    Anesthetic technique: The choice of sedation or GETA depends on the size and location of lesions. GETA with
                                    muscle relaxation is usually required to minimize any involuntary movement caused by IRE ablation.  Otherwise,
                                    IRE has anesthetic considerations similar to those for radiofrequency ablation. Some small-volume ablations may be
                                    tolerated with MAC, and anesthetic requirements should be discussed with the radiologist.

                                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                                                             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Procedure duration may be unpredictable.
     Out-of-Operating Room

                                    Maintenance
                                                             It is important that adequate neuromuscular blockade is maintained due to intense direct
           Procedures

                                                             muscle stimulation that may be caused by IRE treatment.

                                    Emergence                Standard emergence. Short-acting analgesics (e.g., fentanyl 25–150 mcg) should be used in
                                                             outpatients. Prophylactic treatment with antiemetics may be beneficial because there is a
                                                             high incidence of PONV.

                                    Blood and fluid          IV: 20–14 ga × 1–2                 Larger iv access needed for hepatic lesions.
                                       requirements          NS/LR: 3–5 mL/kg/h

===== PAGE ? =====
Irreversible Electroporation (IRE Ablation)          1533

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1)         ↑BP (20–30 mm Hg) is common following treatment
                                               ± Arterial line                        cycles, but may be extreme during treatment of upper
                                               ± Foley catheter                        pole renal tumors (inadvertent adrenal stimulation).
                                                                                       Arterial line may be useful for ablation procedures near
                                                                                       the heart, for large-volume ablations, and in patients
                                                                                       with renal impairment.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points              Extension of the arms above the head may be required
                                               3 eyes                                 for optimal CT imaging; if prolonged, this may result in
                                                                                      a brachial plexus injury, particularly when the patient is
                                                                                      in a supine position.

                    Complications              Hemorrhage                             Blood should be readily available. Large retroperitoneal
                                                                                      hemorrhage can develop.
                                               Pneumothorax                           Needle decompression and/or thoracostomy tube place-
                                                                                      ment may be necessary during thoracic or high hepatic
                                                                                      procedures.
                                               Muscle stimulation                     Intense stimulation of skeletal muscles and the dia-
                                                                                      phragm may be produced. Movement should be mini-
                                                                                      malized by use of adequate dosage of muscle relaxants.
                                                                                      Neuromuscular monitoring is useful to maintain a con-
                                                                                      stant level of neuromuscular blockade.
                                               Dysrhythmias                           Application of large currents may cause dysrhythmias.
                                                                                      Occasionally, the treatment pulses may capture the ven-
                                                                                      tricles resulting in a short run of ventricular tachycardia,
                                                                                      which should resolve at the end of each 10 pulse treat-
                                                                                      ment cycle.   Although rarely required, a defibrillator/
                                                                                      external pacer should be available.
                                               Acid-base and electrolyte              Patients may develop ↑ K during ablation of very large
                                               disturbances                           tumors or in the presence of preexisting renal impair-
                                                                                      ment. Monitor arterial blood electrolytes during the pro-
                                                                                      cedure in those patients.
                                               Hypothermia                            Patients may experience ↓ body temperature during
                                                                                      lengthy procedures in the CT scanning room. Lower-
                                                                                      body hot-air blankets may be used.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              PONV                                         Common
                                               Hemorrhage                                   Occult blood loss may continue for several hours
                                                                                            after the procedure has terminated.

                    Pain                       Standard pain management                     Postprocedural pain is usually mild and well                          Out-of-Operating Room
                      management                                                            tolerated.
                                                                                                                                                                        Procedures

                    Tests                      HCT, as indicated

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Ball C, Thomson KR, Kavnoudias H: Irreversible electroporation: a new challenge in “out of operating theater” anesthesia.
                        Anesth Analg 2010; 110(5):1305–9.
                     2. Cannon R, Ellis S, Hayes D, et al: Safety and early efficacy of irreversible electroporation for hepatic tumors in proximity to
                        vital structures. J Surg Oncol 2013; 107(5):544–9.
                     3. Gehl J: Electroporation: theory and methods, perspectives for drug delivery, gene therapy and research. Acta Physiol Scand
                        2003; 177(4):437–47.

===== PAGE ? =====
1534   c h a p t e r 13.1      Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Adult

                                      4. Lee EW, Chen C, Prieto VE, et al: Advanced hepatic ablation technique for creating complete cell death: irreversible
                                         electroporation. Radiology. 2010; 255(2):426–33.
                                      5. Lee EW, Thai S, Kee ST: Irreversible electroporation: a novel image-guided cancer therapy. Gut Liver 2010; Suppl 1: S99–104.

                                    Suggested Viewing
                                    Links are available online to the following videos:
                                    TIPSS, Transjugular Intrahepatic Porto-Systemic Shunt: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2u4_hF3234
                                    ONYX embolization of AVM (skip to minute 5 for the animation): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgxyPzkiNXU
                                    AVM Embolization Using Onyx-18: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rI_hOWX39I&NR=1&feature=endscreen
                                    Endovascular Coiling of Unruptured Ophthalmic Artery Aneurysm:
                                    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZCF53vczDyo
                                    ICD Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_E06rkY4T8
                                    AERO‚ Fully Covered Tracheobronchial Stent Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IzNZ4_0rNg
                                    NEJM Procedure: Thrombus Aspiration: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bUMm8E0w6s
     Out-of-Operating Room
           Procedures

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                              13.2 Out-of-Operating Room
                                               Procedures—Pediatric

                                               procedural specialists
                                               Claudia Mueller, MD, PhD
                                               William E. Berquist, MD (Gastroenterology)
                                               Sarah S. Donaldson, MD, FACR, FASTRO (Radiation oncology)
                                               Anne M. Dubin, MD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)
                                               Jeffrey A. Feinstein, MD, MPH (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)
                                               Gary E. Hartman, MD (ECMO)
                                               Susan Hiniker, MD (Radiation oncology)
                                               Neyssa Marina, MD (Oncology)
                                               Stanton B. Perry, MD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)
                                               Kalyani R. Trivedi, MD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)
                                               Ann Ming Yeh, MD (Gastroenterology)

                                               anesthesiologists
                                               Komal Kamra, MD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)
                                               Rebecca E. Claure, MD (Radiation therapy, oncology, endoscopy, imaging)
                                               Brenda Golianu, MD (Radiation therapy, oncology, endoscopy, imaging)
                                               Manchula Navaratnam, MD (ECMO)
                                               Chandra Ramamoorthy, MD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization, ECMO)
                                               Kristin Sun, MD (Oncology)
                                               Claudia Benkwitz, MD, PhD (Pediatric cardiac catheterization)

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Radiation Therapy
                                          PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Susan Hiniker and Sarah S. Donaldson
                                     Description: Modern pediatric radiation therapy (XRT) requires that the patient be in a stable and reproducible po-
                                     sition for daily treatment. Sharply defined beams with secondary collimation are used to irradiate the tumor volume
                                     and to spare normal tissue. Patient movement may undermine techniques for sparing normal tissue, and although
                                     movement cannot be completely prevented, it must be minimized. In very young children, it is often impossible
                                     to prevent movement and achieve adequate cooperation for radiation treatment. In such cases, daily anesthesia is
                                     required. Close cooperation of the radiation oncology and anesthesia teams allows for safe and reproducible daily
                                     treatment. In general, children older than 3 or 4 yr can be persuaded to lie still for radiation therapy. Children from
                                     2.5 to 4 yr may cooperate during the treatment (which is usually < 15 min), but not for the treatment planning and
                                     simulation, in which an immobilization-stabilization device is made (often requiring 1–1.5 h) (see Fig. 13.2-1). In
                                     most infants and young children (< 4 yr), anesthesia is essential.
                                     The optimal position for XRT must also be optimal for the anesthesiologist. Ideally, the area to be treated is deter-
                                     mined using 3-dimensional conformal techniques to optimize treatment and to minimize normal tissue exposure.
                                     This requires a cross-sectional imaging study (e.g., CT scan), with the patient in the identical position as will be used
                                     during the radiation treatment. A series of radiographs are taken at the treatment-planning (simulation) appoint-
                                     ment, which typically lasts 1–1.5 h and requires GA. It is essential that there be no patient movement between expo-
                                     sures; if the patient moves, the entire procedure must be repeated. Typically the patient is transported to the CT suite
                                     for a 3-dimensional treatment-planning CT scan. Anesthesia preparation may be initiated in the treatment-planning
                                     suite, or in a nearby preparation room. After scans are obtained, individual beam-shaping devices are made, and a
                                     multistep process of contouring begins for treatment planning.
                                     Seven to 10 days following the initial planning session, the patient often has a verification procedure, which is usually
                                     of shorter duration—generally requiring only 30 min of anesthesia time. The verification procedure consists of a se-
                                     ries of radiographs using the beam-shaping devices, which simulate the treatment to be given. When this procedure
      Out-of-Operating Room
            Procedures

                                                                        Figure 13.2-1. A radiation therapy vault.

                              1536

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Radiation Therapy        1537

                                                Figure 13.2-2. A plastic immobilization cast of the head.

                     is successfully completed, the anesthetized patient is moved to the treatment room. The child is put in the identical
                     position achieved during the planning/verification procedures, and treatment is administered.
                     The first day or two, and weekly thereafter, a verification x-ray (called a “port film”) is taken to confirm the accuracy of
                     the treatment field. The treatment itself is only a few minutes in duration for each field; ideally, the entire procedure is
                     completed within 15–30 min. A form of radiotherapy treatment planning and delivery known as intensity-modulated
                     radiotherapy (IMRT) may require slightly longer treatment times due to the larger number and increased complexity
                     of fields treated, while volumetric modulated arc therapy may be of shorter treatment time. A course of treatment
                     may be only a few days or may last for 5–6 wk, generally with treatment given 5 × per week. Occasionally, multiple
                     (2–3) treatments per day are given at 4–8 h (usually 6 h) intervals. At the initial appointment, the patient’s optimal
                     position is determined, an immobilization device is constructed, and measurements are taken. The immobilization
                     device is usually a body cradle or cast, and often a head/face mask is made for head and neck or brain treatment
                     (see Fig. 13.2-2). Initially, temporary marks or Band-Aids are used; however, when the final positioning has been
                     determined, a more permanent mark, such as a tattoo, may be applied. Often, a head holder with a mask is applied
                     to ensure the position for XRT.
                     In managing certain brain tumors (e.g., medulloblastoma, high-grade intratentorial ependymoma, germ cell tumors,
                     and CNS leukemia), cranial spinal irradiation (CSI) may be used. Conventionally, this procedure requires that the
                     patient be placed in the prone position with the head flexed as much as possible to minimize a cervical lordosis. This
                     positioning, however, creates special difficulties for the anesthesiologist. If the child is intubated for the setup, the
                     radiation stabilization device must allow space for the ETT. If the child is not intubated, there must be adequate ac-
                     cess to the airway. Current techniques allow patients to be treated with CSI in the supine position, facilitating easier
                     airway access for the anesthesiologist, more secure patient immobilization, and faster treatment times.
                     Fractionation: Pediatric protocols have been testing the efficacy of giving multiple fractions (treatments) of radia-
                     tion 2–3 × per day, usually at 6-h intervals, to allow higher total radiation doses to be administered with possible less
                     normal tissue morbidity. These schemes have been or are being evaluated for children with central nervous system                        Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                   Procedures

                     tumors and total body irradiation (TBI) in preparation for bone marrow transplantation. Until proven to be of in-
                     creased efficacy, such schemes should remain part of large protocol studies. The timing of radiotherapy may be at 4-,
                     6-, or 8-h intervals 2–3 × per day, depending on the protocol. These studies provide several challenges for anesthesi-
                     ologists, radiotherapists, and parents. Radiotherapy under anesthesia, however, has been successfully administered
                     to infants undergoing multiple fractions per day. Attention must be given to potential malnutrition and/or dehydra-
                     tion from prolonged periods of NPO status.
                     Total-body irradiation (TBI): Although most TBI techniques are administered with the patient standing, infants
                     and small children must lie prone and supine for the treatment. This positioning requires sedation and/or anesthesia.
                     Gastrointestinal upset, sometimes provoked by the radiation, presents an additional challenge for proper radio-
                     therapy technique, as well as for anesthetic management.
                     Cranial or Body Radiation/Radiosurgery/IGRT: The technique of using precision, stereotactically localized
                     radiation with a highly collimated radiotherapy photon beam, as generated from a linear accelerator, is currently

===== PAGE ? =====
1538   c h a p t e r 13.2   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     being employed for select patients with small cranial, base-of-skull, or body tumors. There is increasing enthusi-
                                     asm for this technique for infants and children with recurrent posterior fossa and cerebral tumors, craniopharyn-
                                     giomas, optic nerve and chiasmal gliomas, and small AVMs. Radiosurgery has historically required a frame-based
                                     technique that requires 6–10 h of continuous anesthesia while a patient undergoes application of a metal frame,
                                     CT localization, and multiport radiotherapy treatment. However, newer technology, using image guidance, called
                                     image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) now allows frameless radiation delivery to the cranium or body. This
                                     technique requires a 1–1.5 h treatment planning and simulation session followed by a single fraction or limited
                                     number of treatment sessions each lasting 1.5–2 h. These approaches require close coordination between the
                                     anesthesiologist, neurosurgeon, oncologic surgeon, and radiotherapist.
                                     IMRT/Protons/VMAT: Recent developments in external beam radiotherapy techniques have allowed for increas-
                                     ingly conformal treatment using intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) or proton therapy. However, these
                                     complex techniques generally involve image-guided therapy and a greater number of beam directions, thereby
                                     resulting in longer overall treatment times. The development of volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT), in
                                     which dose is delivered using a single gantry arc rotation, has allowed for treatment of very conformal volumes
                                     with increased speed as well as delivery of fewer monitor units. VMAT is increasingly used in the treatment of
                                     pediatric patients, particularly in those who require anesthesia during treatment.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Leukemia; brain tumors (benign or malignant); retinoblastoma; solid tumors of
                                     childhood.

                                       ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                             Standard XRT/IMRT                     TBI                             Frameless Radiosurgery

                                       Position              Supine or prone                       Supine and prone                Supine or prone

                                       Unique                If prone: head flexed for maximal     May be repeated 2–3 ×/day       Head extended for
                                         considerations      straightening of the C-spine.         at 4–6 h intervals.             stabilization of airway.

                                       Anesthesia time       Planning: 30–120 min                  45–60 min                       30–90 min
                                                             Treatment: < 15 min
                                                             (IMRT: 15–30 min)                     < 20 min                        90–120 min

                                       Postop care           PACU → home                           PACU → room                     PACU → home

                                       ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                       Age range             Usually ≤ 4 yr

                                       Male:Female           1:1

                                       Incidence             NA

                                       Associated            Brain tumors: ↑ ICP is of concern in these patients. Postradiation edema following the first few
                                         conditions:         treatments may further ↑ ICP, with potential for brain stem herniation. Some children with brain
                                                             stem tumors are particularly difficult to anesthetize, perhaps because of disruption of nerve path-
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             ways in those areas of the brain stem that are affected by anesthetics.
            Procedures

                                       Associated            Neuroblastoma: Neuroblastomas are capable of secreting catecholamines and related sub-
                                         conditions:         stances; hence, there is a potential for paroxysmal HTN during anesthesia induction. In these
                                         (cont’d)            children, the principles of anesthetic management are similar to those for pheochromocytoma.
                                                             Retinoblastoma: It is imperative that the patient be properly immobilized with no movement, as
                                                             even a mm of change, as occurs with a sigh, may cause unnecessary radiation to the radiosensi-
                                                             tive lens and anterior chamber. Optimal anesthesia prevents nystagmus and motion of the head.
                                                             Even minimal lateral or rotary nystagmus may increase the risk of cataract induction.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Radiation Therapy       1539

                             ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                     Rebecca E. Claure and Brenda Golianu

                            PREPROCEDURE
                     Orientation to the XRT suite (see Fig. 13.2-1), positive reinforcement, and play therapy can reduce the number of
                     children requiring anesthesia for XRT; however, the majority of children ≤ 4 yr will require anesthesia. A detailed
                     preanesthesia visit is essential and is also an opportunity to gain the confidence of both child and parents. The ma-
                     jority of these patients will have received chemotherapy and should be evaluated for side effects. The importance
                     of NPO status needs to be stressed repeatedly, discussing the potential danger of emesis during treatment. Written
                     instructions regarding preop protocols are extremely helpful in this context. For children with cancer, prolonged
                     preop fasting for XRT once or twice daily could severely compromise an already marginal nutritional intake. Infants,
                     children, and adolescents should be encouraged to drink clear liquids until 2 h before treatment. Milk and solid
                     foods should be held for an appropriate time interval (6–8 h depending on age. See Appendix D). Reassessment
                     before each anesthetic is recommended because the patient’s medical status may change during the course of radia-
                     tion therapy. Some children will have Sx of ↑ ICP, which must be taken into account when designing an anesthetic
                     plan to avoid ↑ PaCO2 and other factors that may further ↑ ICP.
                     The most common diagnoses are primary CNS tumor (28–33%), retinoblastoma (9–26%), acute leukemia (9–26%),
                     neuroblastoma (2–18%), lymphoma (8%), rhabdomyosarcoma (5–7%), Wilms’ tumor (5%), and Ewings (5%). The total
                     number of treatments can range from 1 to 65 (median 20–24). Many patients require a mold of the head and neck.
                     Children can range in age from infants to adolescents, with a median age of 2.4–3.8 yr.

                      Respiratory              Careful evaluation for respiratory compromise due to chemotherapy. Patients with Sx of
                                               URI (rhinorrhea, cough, fever) are commonly seen during XRT treatment. If Sxs are sig-
                                               nificant, XRT should be delayed, and the patient should be evaluated by primary service.
                                               Fortunately, most children can be managed without the use of an ETT, which itself can
                                               increase the risk of oxygen desaturation, laryngospasm, and bronchospasm. The benefit of
                                               XRT vs delaying treatment must be balanced against the risks of anesthesia.
                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                      Cardiac                  Careful evaluation for cardiac compromise due to chemotherapy.
                                               Tests: As indicated from H&P

                      Neurologic               Patients with intracranial tumors may have ↑ ICP. Postradiation edema following the first
                                               few treatments may further ↑ ICP. Sx includes irritability, HA, N/V, and papilledema. Sus-
                                               picion of ↑ ICP mandates ETT intubation and controlled ventilation to induce hypocarbia.

                      Laboratory               Tests as indicated from H&P

                      Premedication            Usually unnecessary in this patient group. Parents usually present for induction, and ma-
                                               jority of patients have some form of central venous access or heplock in situ. If inhalational
                                               induction necessary, midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po may be helpful. Inappropriate seda-
                                               tion may cause respiratory or cardiovascular depression and prolong recovery.                             Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                               Procedures

                           INTRAPROCEDURE
                     Anesthetic technique: Provision of anesthesia to children at sites remote from the OR is challenging. During XRT,
                     patients must remain immobile so that the tumor can be reliably irradiated while minimizing damage to uninvolved
                     tissue. Anesthetic goals should include patient immobility, rapid onset, brief duration of action, and prompt recov-
                     ery. The anesthetic should allow maintenance of a patent airway and spontaneous ventilation in a variety of body
                     positions. Ketamine is a potent sialogogue and can cause nystagmus, which prevents precision radiation of retino-
                     blastomas. It may cause prolonged or unpleasant emergence and should be avoided in patients with ↑ ICP. Choice
                     of anesthetic technique may be limited by equipment or logistical issues. Anesthesia machines may not be available
                     in all XRT suites.

===== PAGE ? =====
1540   c h a p t e r 13.2    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Induction                  IV: Propofol (2–4 mg/kg), titrated slowly to effect. Additional propofol boluses may be
                                                                needed as patients may develop tolerance. Intubation is usually not needed.
                                                                Inhalation: Mask induction with sevoflurane is appropriate in children without iv access
                                                                and may be preferred by some children. The airway can almost always be maintained
                                                                by careful positioning and extension of the neck. It is essential that this same degree of
                                                                extension/flexion be maintained for each treatment. A molded immobilization device may
                                                                 be placed over the patient’s head and neck (see Fig. 13.2-2).

                                     Maintenance                IV: Propofol (100–250 mcg/kg/min) by continuous infusion. Supplemental O2 should be
                                                                administered via nasal prongs.
                                                                Inhalation: Sevoflurane in O2

                                     Emergence                  Patients awaken rapidly following cessation of propofol infusion or sevoflurane. XRT may
                                                                cause nausea/vomiting, so antiemetics should be given (ondansetron 0.1–0.15 mg/kg).
                                                                Avoid dexamethasone (may conflict with chemotherapy protocols and in rare cases may
                                                                cause tumor lysis syndrome).

                                     Blood and fluid            IV: Central access                       Majority of children receiving radiotherapy have
                                        requirements                                                     some form of central venous access.
                                                                NS/LR: Routine maintenance

                                     Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. D-1).          A critical problem is the lack of access to the patient
                                                                                                         and monitors during XRT. A video camera with a zoom
                                                                                                         lens can focus on the monitors, and a second camera
                                                                                                         is trained on the patient. In XRT suites with a viewing
                                                                                                         window, a small marker may be placed on the chest so
                                                                                                         that the rise and fall of chest motion is seen easily.

                                     Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                Careful positioning 2° possible chemotherapy-
                                                                3 eyes                                   induced peripheral neuropathy.

                                     Complications              Airway obstruction                       Respiratory obstruction may occur; it usually
                                                                                                         responds to nasal or oral airways and careful
                                                                                                         repositioning.
                                                                Patient movement                         Deepen anesthesia.

                                         POSTPROCEDURE

                                     Complications              PONV                                     Many patients have chemotherapy-induced nausea,
                                                                                                         which may be exacerbated by anesthesia, XRT, and
                                                                                                         stress.
                                                                Central line sepsis                      Patients may be immunocompromised following
                                                                                                         chemotherapy. Attention to sterility during access
                                                                                                         of the central venous line is critical because repeated
                                                                                                         use by multiple health care providers ↑ risk of cathe-
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                                                                                         ter contamination. Aseptic preparation of anesthetic
            Procedures

                                                                                                         iv medications, especially propofol, is important.
                                                                Cerebral edema                           In patients with ↑ ICP, XRT can provoke an acute
                                                                                                         ↑ ICP, with consequent ↑ HA, ↑ N/V, ↓ conscious-
                                                                                                         ness, and cardiac arrest. These patients should be
                                                                                                         monitored × 24-h post-XRT.

                                     Pain                       Standard approaches                      Radiation treatments are not associated with pain,
                                       management                                                        but narcotics may be useful in relieving pain associ-
                                                                                                         ated with neoplastic disease.

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Buehrer S, Immoos S, Frei M, et al: Evaluation of propofol for repeated prolonged deep sedation in children undergoing
                                          proton radiation therapy. Br J Anaesth 2007; 99(4):556–60.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and Electrophysiology                1541

                        2. Keidan I, Perel A, Shabtai E, et al: Children undergoing repeated exposures for radiation therapy do not develop tolerance to
                           propofol. Anesthesiology 2004; 100(2):251–4.
                        3. McFadyen JG, Pelly N, Orr RJ: Sedation and anesthesia for the pediatric patient undergoing radiation therapy. Curr Opin
                           Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(4):433–8.
                        4. Parker WA, Freeman CR: A simple technique for craniospinal irradiation in the supine position. Radiother Oncol 2006;
                           78(2):217–22.
                        5. Seiler G, De Vol E, Khafaga Y, et al: Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of repeated sedations for the radiotherapy of young
                           children with cancer: a prospective study of 1033 consecutive sedations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2001; 49(3):771–83.
                        6. Tsai YL, Tsai SC, Yen SH, et al: Efficacy of therapeutic play for pediatric brain tumor patients during external beam
                           radiotherapy. Childs Nerv Syst 2013; 29(7):1123–9.

                     Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and
                     Electrophysiology
                             PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                     Kalyani R. Trivedi, Anne M. Dubin, Stanton B. Perry, and Jeffrey A. Feinstein
                     Cardiac catheterization and electrophysiology testing have evolved over the recent decades from purely diagnostic
                     tools to combined diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. Although the use of GA varies from institution to institu-
                     tion, higher levels of sedation are required at a minimum for critically ill patients, those requiring complex inter-
                     ventional strategies, small children who must remain totally still, and when TEE is used for image-guided therapy. A
                     thorough review of diagnostic and interventional cardiac catheterization and electrophysiology is not possible in this
                     chapter, and the interested reader is referred to the multiple textbooks available on the subject.
                     The placement of anesthesia equipment for these procedures must allow for (a) proper positioning of the patient, (b)
                     easy access to the head and neck and/or groin for the physician performing the procedure, and (c) rotation and an-
                     gulation of the imaging equipment. The goal of sedation in all of these procedures is to provide a nontraumatic, safe
                     environment for the patient. Many patients can be cared for adequately and safely using conscious sedation; however,
                     there is a subset of pediatric patients who may require GA. This group may include patients with complex congenital
                     heart disease, ventricular dysfunction, or airway abnormalities. It is important to understand that certain anesthetic
                     agents may alter cardiac conduction, making arrhythmia inducibility more difficult. Catecholamine-dependent ar-
                     rhythmias, such as an automatic atrial tachycardia, may be impossible to induce with the patient under GA. Further-
                     more, the arrhythmia itself may complicate anesthetic care, by causing sudden decreases in BP due to excessively
                     rapid rates. In patients undergoing radiofrequency ablation (RFA) in areas close to other critical structures of the
                     heart, GA may be necessary to keep the patient motionless during application of energy.

                     VASCULAR ACCESS
                     The modified Seldinger technique of cannulating blood vessels percutaneously is used to establish vascular ac-
                     cess for cardiac catheterization. (The femoral, IJ, and subclavian veins are most commonly used for venous access.)
                     Transhepatic access to the IVC has been used safely and successfully in patients without femoral venous access. The
                     femoral artery is most commonly used, although the carotid and axillary arteries may be used for specific procedures                             Out-of-Operating Room
                     or when there is bilateral femoral artery occlusion. In newborns, the umbilical artery and vein may be used. Access
                                                                                                                                                                            Procedures

                     may be especially difficult in patients who have undergone multiple previous procedures. In the most severe cases,
                     reconstructive transcatheter techniques, including balloon angioplasty and stent implantation to rehabilitate
                     the vessels, have been used to allow future catheter-based diagnostic and therapeutic interventions.
                     Infiltration of the skin and the subcutaneous tissues with a local anesthetic agent to reduce pain is used when the
                     procedure is being performed under conscious sedation. With GA, infiltration of a local anesthetic agent may be
                     deferred to the end of the procedure to alleviate pain and discomfort at vascular access sites during recovery.

                     HEMODYNAMIC DATA
                     O2 sat measurements are made routinely in the various cardiac chambers, vena cavae, and great vessels. These mea-
                     surements are used to calculate the systemic flow (CO, Qs), pulmonary flow (Qp), the ratio of the pulmonary to
                     systemic flow (Qp:Qs), and PVR and SVR.

===== PAGE ? =====
1542   c h a p t e r 13.2    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     It is ideal to obtain the data with the patient awake and breathing spontaneously in room air. This is rarely possible
                                     in pediatric patients. The use of light anesthesia and sedation during the diagnostic part of the study facilitates
                                     acquisition of data in as near-normal state as possible. It is important to recognize and limit effects on intracardiac
                                      and intrapulmonary pressures and systemic and pulmonary resistances when the procedure is done under GA with
                                      IPPV. At a minimum, and when tolerated, baseline hemodynamic measurements should be performed with an FiO2
                                      as close to 0.21 as possible. In some cases, additional diagnostic information may be collected to study the effects of
                                      O2, NO, vasodilators or inotropes, exercise and balloon occlusion of intracardiac or extracardiac shunts on the CO,
                                      pulmonary flow, and PVR and SVR.
                                     From O2 sat, dissolved O2 (PO2), and Hb measurements, the O2 content (mL/dL) of the mixed venous blood and
                                     systemic arterial blood is used to calculate systemic AV O2 content difference. Pulmonary AV O2 content difference
                                     is similarly estimated by calculating the O2 content of pulmonary venous and arterial blood. Systemic (Qs) and pul-
                                     monary flow (Qp) can then be derived using the Fick principle:

                                                                                             O2 consumption (mL/min)
                                                                  Flow (Q)(L/min) =
                                                                                       AV O2 difference (mL of O2/L of blood)

                                     When the partial pressure of dissolved O2 is < 100, the PO2 portion of the equation can be negated, and the flow can
                                     be calculated using the O2 consumption and O2 sat measurements alone.

                                                                                                     O2 consumption
                                                            Pulmonary Flow (Qp)=
                                                                                    Pulmonary vein SaO2 – Pulmonary artery SaO2
                                                                                                    O2 consumption
                                                              Systemic Flow (Qs)=
                                                                                      Systemic artery SaO2 – Mixed venous SaO2

                                     Based on Ohms law, which states V = IR, where V = voltage (or pressure drop) across a circuit, I = the current (or
                                     flow) through the circuit, and R = the resistance in the circuit. SVR and PVR can be calculated as follows:
                                                                                     PVR = (PAp – LAp)/Qp
                                                                                     SVR = (Aop – RAp)/Qs
                                     Where PAp = pulmonary artery pressure; LAp = left atrial pressure; Aop = aortic pressure; and RAp = right atrial pres-
                                     sure; pulmonary vascular resistance = PVR; systemic vascular resistance = SVR.

                                     ANGIOGRAPHY
                                     Biplane cineangiography is performed to delineate intracardiac or vascular anatomy and to evaluate ventricular func-
                                     tion. Images are obtained by injection of radiographic contrast agents through angiographic catheters positioned in
                                     appropriate locations. The angiograms may be performed in posteroanterior and lateral projections or by angling
                                     the cameras to obtain cranial, caudal, left anterior, or right anterior oblique projections. Based on the site of injec-
                                     tion and the information required, the injection may be performed with a power injector, delivering large amounts
                                     of contrast quickly, or by hand.
      Out-of-Operating Room
            Procedures

                                     INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
                                     Valvuloplasty
                                     Aortic valvuloplasty: A retrograde approach from the femoral artery generally is used, although an antegrade and
                                     transseptal approach from the femoral vein is preferred by some. In either approach, following hemodynamic evalu-
                                     ation and angiographic estimate of the aortic valve annulus, a wire is positioned across the valve, and a balloon cath-
                                     eter is advanced over the wire and positioned across the aortic valve. The balloon is then inflated and deflated quickly.
                                     The inflation of the balloon leads to a transient loss of CO, ↓ SBP, and occasionally may be accompanied by ↓ HR.
                                     These hemodynamic changes recover quickly on balloon deflation. Although complications of aortic valvuloplasty
                                     are rare, the anesthesiologist must be “prepared for the worst,” which includes annular rupture and the creation of
                                     significant aortic regurgitation.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and Electrophysiology          1543

                     Pulmonic valvuloplasty: After femoral venous or IJ access is obtained, the technique for balloon dilation of the
                     pulmonary valve is nearly identical to that outlined above for the aortic valve. Loss of CO and ↓ HR are seen during
                     the time of balloon inflation with this intervention as well. Although annular rupture also is a potential complica-
                     tion of this procedure, the creation of pulmonary insufficiency is of less concern and better tolerated than aortic
                     insufficiency.

                     Angioplasty
                     A number of transcatheter treatment options are available for management of pulmonary artery stenoses, including
                     balloon angioplasty and endovascular stent implantation. Angioplasty has been shown to be highly effective in
                     anatomically appropriate cases with a low complication rate. Hemodynamic and angiographic assessment of the lesion
                     is obtained, followed by selection of an optimal balloon catheter, based on both the size of the stenosis and surrounding
                     “normal” tissue. Using the same “over-the-wire technique,” a balloon is advanced and centered over the stenosis. Hemo-
                     dynamic and angiographic data are assessed following each intervention. A high index of suspicion for complications—
                     including dissection or pulmonary artery tear, obstructive intimal flaps, thrombi, and reperfusion pulmonary edema—
                     is justified, as management may require ventilatory manipulations and/or emergent cardiovascular resuscitation.
                     Balloon angioplasty of coarctation of the aorta may be performed for treatment of native or recurrent coarctation.
                     Angiography of the aorta is performed to delineate the coarctation and estimate the dimension of the coarctated
                     segment and the adjacent aorta. As with other angioplasty techniques, the balloon size is based on the dimensions
                     of the stenotic area and surrounding vessel. Transient loss of lower body perfusion and ↓ HR are to be expected,
                     as with balloon valvuloplasty, on inflation of the balloon. Pressure and angiographic data are obtained to determine
                     adequacy of results and absence of complications. There is a 4–5% incidence of intimal tear and dissection that, in
                     most cases, are nonprogressive. Rarely, aortic disruption may require emergent surgical repair.

                     Endovascular Stent Placement
                     Stent implantation in the pulmonary arteries or for aortic coarctation is used to maintain vessel diameter and de-
                     creased gradients in patients unresponsive to balloon dilation. Stents are mounted on balloon catheters, and the
                     balloon/stent combination is advanced over a previously placed wire. A long sheath (originating in the groin or neck)
                     is placed across the area of narrowing to prevent the stent from slipping off the balloon catheter as it makes its way
                     through the heart or vessels. After the stent has been properly positioned, the long sheath is withdrawn to expose
                     the balloon/stent combination. The balloon is inflated to expand the stent and appose it to the vessel wall. Placement
                     of long sheaths, particularly through the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT), can be difficult and may result in
                     transient bradyarrhythmias and loss of CO.

                     Closure of Congenital Defects
                     Atrial septal defects (ASDs): As many as 80–85% of secundum ASDs may be amenable to device closure in the
                     cath lab. Most devices currently used include a left atrial disc with an occlusive membrane, a central spool or con-
                     necting pin, and a right atrial disc with an occlusive membrane. The membrane occludes flow through the defect, and
                     within months, the device becomes incorporated into the septum due to endothelialization. A sizing balloon inflated
                     across the defect permits estimation of the stretched diameter. A long sheath is then placed across the defect over a
                     wire. The device attached to the delivery cable is loaded in the long sheath and advanced to the left atrium. The left
                     atrial disc is opened, the device is withdrawn until the left atrial disc is in contact with the atrial septum; then the
                                                                                                                                                          Out-of-Operating Room
                     right atrial disc is opened, effectively “sandwiching” the atrial septum between the two discs. TEE is used to guide
                     placement of the device. Intracardiac ECHO offers ECHO guidance without the requirement of GA.
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                     Ventricular septal defect (VSD): Closure with a device can be performed in the cath lab for isolated or multiple
                     muscular VSDs, as well as perimembranous defects. The technique requires establishment of a continuous AV guide
                     wire loop across the defect. Most often, the wire course is from the femoral vein, through the right atrium, into the
                     RV, across the VSD, out the aortic valve, around the aorta, and out the femoral artery. The device is then deployed via
                     a long sheath placed across the VSD through the RV aspect. Hemodynamic compromise may be seen with tension on
                     the wire if aortic or tricuspid insufficiency is induced. Transient arrhythmias are routine while crossing the VSD and
                     deploying the device. Great care must be taken to avoid entrapment in the mitral, aortic, and tricuspid valves during
                     device deployment. In addition to fluoroscopy, TEE is used to guide placement of the device. Improvements in the
                     devices developed more recently have significantly reduced the cath lab morbidity of this procedure.
                     Coil occlusion: Aortopulmonary collaterals, AVMs, Blalock-Taussig (B-T) shunts, venous collaterals, coronary
                     artery fistulae, and patent ductus arteriosi (PDA) have all been successfully occluded using the technique of coil

===== PAGE ? =====
1544   c h a p t e r 13.2    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     embolization. The embolization coils consist of a metal wire, either stainless steel or platinum, ± Dacron strands, and
                                     are available in multiple sizes, lengths, and shapes. Although PDA or coronary artery fistula embolization may obvi-
                                     ate the need for surgery, most embolizations serve to either reduce the cardiac workload by decreasing the amount
                                     of shunting or simplify a planned surgical procedure.
                                     The technique for coil closure of collaterals or other communications is straightforward. A catheter is placed in the
                                     vessel to be occluded, and a selective angiogram is done to delineate the anatomy and diameter of the vessel to be
                                     closed. Coils that are slightly larger than the diameter of the vessel are used because the vessel will distend when the
                                     coil is deployed. Using a long “pusher” wire, the coil is advanced through the catheter and deployed in the vessel.
                                     Repeat angiography is performed to confirm complete closure. If residual flow remains, additional coils are placed.
                                      Coil dislodgement and embolization to a distal blood vessel are the most common complications. In general, the errant
                                      coil can be retrieved in the cath lab without much difficulty and a new coil of a larger size placed to occlude the vessel.

                                     OTHER PROCEDURES
                                     Endomyocardial biopsy is commonly performed for rejection surveillance in patients following cardiac transplan-
                                     tation. It also may be performed in patients presenting with acute onset of cardiomyopathy for histopathological
                                     Dx of myocarditis. The preferred site for obtaining cardiac biopsy is the RV aspect of the intraventricular septum.
                                     The specimen is obtained with a biopsy forceps advanced to the RV through a long sheath. It is usual to obtain four
                                     to five specimens to improve the diagnostic gain, as the histopathological changes can be patchy. Complications of
                                     endomyocardial biopsy include cardiac perforation and tricuspid valve damage. GA is required in patients with com-
                                     promised airway and/or cardiopulmonary status from lymphoproliferative disease or obesity 2° to steroid therapy.
                                     A variety of other transcatheter therapeutic procedures may be performed in the cardiac cath suite. Rashkind bal-
                                     loon atrial septostomy, static balloon septoplasty, Brockenbrough transseptal needle puncture, and radio-
                                     frequency-assisted perforation of the pulmonary valve or the atrial septum are all less commonly used than the
                                     procedures described above, but routinely are undertaken in high-volume cath labs.

                                     ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY STUDY (EPS)
                                     Patients with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias may require either diagnostic or therapeutic interventions in the cath
                                     lab. EP studies are catheterization procedures in which intracardiac electrical signals are recorded via specialized
                                     catheters that can both record electrical activity and stimulate the heart. These studies often are used to make a Dx of
                                     the mechanism of arrhythmia, assess the hemodynamic impact of the arrhythmia, assess efficacy of pharmacologic
                                     therapy, and map the location of abnormal conduction pathways or automatic foci. Although routine studies usually
                                     take 2–3 h, some may be quite lengthy.
                                     Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a procedure in which abnormal electrical conducting pathways or automatic
                                     electrical foci (identified by EPS) are destroyed, using the application of RF energy delivered through a deflectable
                                     electrode catheter. This procedure was first described in pediatric surgery in 1991, but has rapidly become a pre-
                                     ferred therapeutic option for supraventricular tachycardia in this population. On some occasions, RF lesions must be
                                     placed close to other critical structures in the heart (e.g., AV node).
                                     With advances in technology and an increased understanding of high-risk pediatric patient populations, transve-
                                     nous pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) placements are becoming more common in
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                     the pediatric population. Pacemaker placement has become more common as data have accumulated regarding
                                     the risk of sudden death in patients with congenital complete heart block, as well as increased survival with postop
            Procedures

                                     heart block. New indications for ICD placement in patients with long-QT syndrome, congenital heart disease, and
                                     hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have increased the number of ICD implantations in the last 5 yr. These procedures are
                                     commonly performed in the cath lab under GA.

                                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Claudia Benkwitz, Komal Kamra, and Chandra Ramamoorthy

                                          PREprocedure
                                     Cardiac catheterization and interventional procedures in children, ranging from those requiring simple diagnos-
                                     tic procedures to those requiring complex interventional procedures, such as balloon angioplasties or stent place-
                                     ments, have facilitated care of younger, smaller, and sicker patients. These patients are often challenging for the

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and Electrophysiology          1545

                     anesthesiologist due to their abnormal cardiac anatomy and physiology. Many of them have undergone repeated
                     catheterizations and have had multiple anesthetics. All patients require a thorough preanesthetic evaluation with
                     emphasis on cardiorespiratory function and associated comorbidities (almost 30% of patients show associated anom-
                     alies or syndromes with Down syndrome being the most common). Most children will follow the same NPO protocol
                     as they would for surgery (see NPO Guidelines, p. D-1). Particular attention should be paid to patients with single-
                     ventricle physiology (Fontan circulation), who are dependent on their venous return for hemodynamic stability and
                     oxygenation as well as prone to shunt thrombosis, specifically when dehydrated. In such patients early establishment
                     of iv access to prevent dehydration is advisable. Clear liquids can be given up to 2 h before surgery.

                      Previous                3 Surgical, interventional and radiological procedures; h/o difficult access; endotracheal
                        anesthesia            tube size and anesthetic techniques; problems with previous anesthetics.

                      Family history          3 Family history for anesthetic-related problems; h/o malignant hyperthermia.

                      Prematurity             3 Gestational age. Need for postop admission and apnea monitoring if < 55 wk
                                               ost-conceptual age; any associated clinical problems.
                                              p

                      Neurological            3 Head ultrasound in neonates to rule out ischemia and hemorrhage; note preoperative
                                              neurological status due to risk of embolism during procedure; h/o seizures or developmen-
                                              tal delay. Heparinization during cardiac catheterization may increase the risk of bleeding.

                      Craniofacial and        3 H/o difficult airway; any surgery to the airway; h/o tracheal stenosis due to multiple intu-
                        airway                bations in the past; stridor due to laryngo- or bronchomalacia; h/o loose teeth.
                                              Tests: Recent bronchoscopy, imaging of the airway.

                      Respiratory             3 Current problem(s): 3 Respiratory reserve (i.e. playing activities, respiratory rate, nasal
                                              flaring, intercostal/subcostal retractions, diaphoresis). 3 H/o cyanosis, chronic cough, ste-
                                              roid use for RAD and other chronic respiratory problems → ensure that they are under
                                              optimal control. 3 H/o recent URI → risk of adverse perioperative events. 3 Patients with
                                              pulmonary hypertension may have obstructive sleep apnea. 3 Cardiac transplant patients
                                              can develop lymphoproliferative disease, which results in redundant lymphoid tissue in the
                                              pharynx and epiglottis → possible airway obstruction. 3 Requirement for supplemental O2,
                                              CPAP, BiPAP, nitric oxide. Medications for pulmonary HTN should be continued.
                                              Tests: SpO2, CXR to r/o infiltrates, CHF and cardiomegaly, PFTs. Compare with baseline.
                                              Assess perfusion scan for distribution of PBF if necessary.

                      Cardiovascular          3Current problem(s): 3 Past surgical history, pacemaker, ICD, etc. If the patient has a
                                               acemaker → check settings, indication(s), underlying rhythm, pacer dependency, and last
                                              p
                                              interrogation. 3 Existing shunts → may affect anesthetic plan and FiO2. 3 Assess car-
                                               diopulmonary reserve (e.g., exercise tolerance, diaphoresis, SOB, feeding difficulties, poor
                                               weight gain). 3 H/o syncope, hypoxic spells, chest pain. Transplant patients may develop
                                               CAD. 3 Arrhythmias, palpitations, murmurs, pulses in all extremities.
                                               Tests: SpO2, ECG; BP (upper/lower extremity) 3 Recent ECHO and cardiac c atheterization
                                               reports.

                                              3 Feeding difficulties, reflux due to chronic use of steroids. May have G-tube/Nissen.
                      Gastrointestinal                                                                                                                  Out-of-Operating Room
                                              3 Some single-ventricle patients may have hepatic dysfunction and protein-losing enter-
                                                                                                                                                              Procedures

                                              opathy (↑ risk ascites, pleural/pericardial effusion, infection).

                      Renal                   3 Patients with CHF are frequently on diuretics and/or ACE inhibitors/digoxin → expect
                                              hypovolemia and potential electrolyte disturbances (i.e. ↑ ↓ K+). 3 Transplant recipients
                                              may develop renal dysfunction due to antirejection medication or HTN. 3 Patients may
                                              have had renal insult during previous surgery.
                                              Tests: 3 BUN and Cr as these patients are also at risk for renal injury due to contrast and
                                              also to guide hydration therapy.

                      Endocrine/              3 Transplant patients are on steroids. 3 for other endocrine concerns.
                        steroid

                      Hematology/             3 History of previous transfusions and reactions. Immunological deficiency that may affect
                        immunology            the type of blood transfusion (e.g., neonates require CMV negative blood and products).
                                              Tests: Recent hematocrit

===== PAGE ? =====
1546   c h a p t e r 13.2   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Syndromes                 3 For coexisting syndromes and associated anomalies.

                                     Ob/Gyn                    3 Last menstrual period.

                                     Vascular                  3 H/o thromboembolism. H/o difficult access and vascular occlusion.

                                     Current                   3 Stop warfarin before cardiac catheterization. Anticoagulate with heparin if needed.
                                       medications             3 Coagulation studies prior to procedure. 3 Antiarrhythmic drugs are usually stopped
                                                               prior to EP studies unless the arrhythmia is frequent and poorly tolerated. Hold diuretics
                                                               and ACE inhibitor starting the night before due to ↑ risk for hypotension following induc-
                                                               tion; continue other cardiac meds.

                                     Laboratory                3 CBC: Use Hgb/HCT baseline to determine need for transfusion; ↑ Hgb/HCT suggests
                                                               chronic hypoxia; transfusion threshold will vary depending on patient age and comorbidi-
                                                               ties. Severe anemia should be corrected prior to cath. 3 Have T&C blood available in the
                                                               catheterization lab for procedures with risk of increased bleeding. 3 WBC: if the child has
                                                               a h/o fever and recent URI. 3 Electrolytes/Bun & creatinine, especially if the patient is on
                                                               diuretics and/or digitalis. 3 Coagulation studies 3 Drug levels (e.g., digitalis, antiseizure
                                                               medications) to ensure therapeutic range. Pregnancy test: must be done the morning of
                                                               surgery if patient has attained menarche.

                                     Premedication             3 Midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po. Be cautious in patients with OSA as they are more sensi-
                                                               tive to respiratory depression. Cyanotic kids should have O2 saturation monitored before
                                                               and continuously after premedication. Antibiotics are given to patients as required for SBE
                                                               prophylaxis or for those undergoing interventional procedures. In patients scheduled for
                                                               EP studies in whom anxiety is a known precipitant of the arrhythmia, preop anxiolysis is a
                                                               relative contraindication as it may result in a false-negative study.

                                     NPO                       ASA fasting guidelines should be followed (see D-1, NPO guidelines). Prolonged NPO in
                                                               single-ventricle physiology and other shunt-dependent lesions should be avoided, as shunt
                                                               flow might decrease with dehydration → ↑ viscosity → ↑ shunt thrombosis.

                                     Equipment                 Transport patient to and from the catheterization lab with a pulse oximeter and other
                                                               monitors as appropriate. Equipment to manage difficult airway and hemodynamically un-
                                                               stable patients should be readily available (e.g., difficult airway cart, I-stat, arterial line,
                                                               blood pump, pumps to infuse vasopressors, pacemaker, defibrillator, NIRS).

                                         INTRAprocedure
                                     Anesthetic technique: Cardiac catheterization can be done under sedation, monitored anesthesia care, and general
                                     anesthesia. Spontaneously breathing patient is preferable so as to mimic normal baseline cardiac and respiratory
                                     physiologic state, and to perform subsequent hemodynamic calculations. General anesthesia may be a safer option
                                     for neonates and younger children because of patient anxiety, longer duration of procedure, and clinical state of
                                     the patient. Patients with moderate to severe pulmonary hypertension present extra challenges and care for these
                                     patients differs among institutions. Because physiological changes associated with intubation, and more likely extu-
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                     bation, might result in a pulmonary hypertensive crisis in these patients, sedation is favored by some anesthesiolog
            Procedures

                                     ists. However, others prefer muscle relaxation and ETT placement, as hypoxia-hypercarbia related to an unsecured
                                     airway can also lead to life-threatening increases in PAP. Older children or patients undergoing procedures of shorter
                                     duration with no other significant comorbidities may tolerate incremental iv sedation with local anesthesia.
                                     A large variety of drug regimens can be used to provide anesthesia/sedation for children undergoing cardiac cath-
                                     eterization procedures. These include propofol, ketamine, remifentanil, dexmedetomidine, midazolam, fentanyl, and
                                     morphine infusions either alone or in combination. While all have been used successfully, bradycardia/sinus arrest,
                                     heart block, hypotension, transient increase in systemic and pulmonary pressures (SVR > PVR) after rapid bolus
                                     injection, as well as insufficient anesthesia/analgesia and prolonged recovery have repeatedly been reported when
                                     dexmedetomidine was used (usually 1 mcg/kg bolus followed by 0.5–2 mcg/kg/h infusion). Independent of what
                                     technique is ultimately used, normoxia and normocarbia are key for these procedures, since hypoxemia, hyperox-
                                     emia, acidosis/alkalosis, and positive pressure ventilation (PPV) all exert significant disturbances in pulmonary vas-
                                     cular resistance. At our institution, a combination of propofol with ketamine (1–2 mg of ketamine/10 mg of propofol

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and Electrophysiology          1547

                     at 25–200 mcg/kg/min) is the preferred option since it provides an almost ideal combination of deep sedation with
                     analgesia, stable hemodynamics, and a spontaneously breathing patient.
                     PPV decreases systemic venous return, particularly in the setting of depleted intravascular volume. This is of par-
                     ticular relevance in those patients with restrictive RV or single-ventricle physiology, where pulmonary blood flow is
                     mostly passive and depends on adequate preload. When possible, patients with Fontan physiology should be allowed
                     to breathe spontaneously. This improves pulmonary blood flow and hence systemic blood flow and cardiac output.

                     ECMO backup should be considered in patients with poor ejection fraction and critically ill neonates. Rarely, for
                     certain interventional procedures, surgical backup and OR availability may have to be prioritized. Significant prepa-
                     ration and coordination are necessary to transport a newborn from the delivery room to catheterization lab for
                     emergent procedure such as atrial septectomy.

                      Induction               Standard inhalation or iv induction (see D-1). As in all patients with CV morbidities having
                                              anesthesia, the choice of anesthetic drugs must include careful consideration of their ef-
                                              fects on myocardial contractility, preload and after-load, pulmonary and systemic vascular
                                              resistance and respiration.

                      Maintenance             General anesthesia with volatile agents (e.g., sevoflurane) or iv infusion with ETT/LMA
                                              to protect airway or O2 supplementation via mask/nasal cannula if deemed appropriate.
                                              Most catheterizations require the patient to be maintained on room air for accurate O2 sat
                                              and pressure measurements. With higher FiO2 (> 0.3), firstly, it will be necessary to consider
                                              the dissolved oxygen fraction when calculating Qp with the Fick equation. Secondly, high
                                              inspired FiO2 will likely result in a reduction of PVR and thereby increasing the Qp/Qs
                                              ratio. More importantly any FiO2 changes should be communicated with the intervention-
                                              alist so that Qp:Qs calculations can be corrected.
                                              Patients with pulmonary HTN presenting for cardiac catheterization are at high risk for
                                              adverse events. Avoid the routine use of antisialogogues so that the heart rate remains at
                                              baseline. While there are differences among institutions, our institutional practice for these
                                              patients is to maintain spontaneous ventilation (uninstrumented airway) under propofol-
                                              ketamine anesthesia.
                                              Patients requiring ASD device closure require TEE placement to guide the correct place-
                                              ment of the device; endotracheal intubation is necessary.
                                              EP studies are best managed with iv propofol 75–200 mcg/kg/min, because this agent has
                                              the least ability to induce dysrhythmias or to interfere with the induction of tachyarrhyth-
                                              mias for diagnostic purposes. Sevoflurane or isoflurane (< 1 MAC) as well as a combination
                                              of propofol and ketamine (7.5–20 mcg/kg/min) are also acceptable. In contrast, remifent-
                                              anil and Dexmedetomidine were both shown to significantly depress sinoatrial and atrio-
                                              ventricular nodal function and are therefore not desirable in patients undergoing EPS for
                                              ablation of SVT. Yet, in patients with a history of prolonged QT interval, TIVA (propofol/
                                              remifentanil) is recommended since both drugs have been shown to have none to minimal
                                              effects on the QTc interval. In this group of patients, dexmedetomidine should be likewise
                                              avoided as it prolongs the QT interval. Caution should be exercised with reversal agents
                                              and various antiemetics, including 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, since they can also pro-
                                              long the QT interval. Since the electrophysiologist is often aware of the likely underlying               Out-of-Operating Room
                                              mechanism of the arrhythmia, this allows for adaptation of the anesthesia technique that is
                                                                                                                                                              Procedures

                                              the least likely to interfere with the patient’s electrophysiology.
                                              Heparin 50–100 U/kg is given for patients with arterial sheaths. The activated clotting
                                              time (ACT) should be in the range of > 300 sec during the procedure and < 175 sec when
                                              the catheters are removed. Once the sheath is removed, a considerable amount of time is
                                              needed to attain hemostasis. NO may be required for the Rx of pulmonary HTN.

                      Emergence                If the patient’s clinical status allows deep extubation, it can be done to prevent coughing.
                                               Use of remifentanil infusion may provide analgesia during the procedure, yet allow for a
                                               rapid emergence. Consider remifentanil for patients with pulmonary HTN and controlled
                                               ventilation, where a smooth emergence is essential to prevent a hypertensive crisis. Inter-
                                               ventional procedures and EP/ablation require hospital admission for observation.

===== PAGE ? =====
1548   c h a p t e r 13.2   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Blood and fluid         IV: 20–22 ga × 1                      A second volume iv may be desirable for interven-
                                        requirements         NS/LR                                 tional cases. The cardiologist also will have a v enous
                                                             PRBCs                                 access line that can be used if necessary. Interven-
                                                             Fluid warmer                          tional procedures may cause tearing of vessels
                                                                                                   and/or myocardium and can cause abrupt hem-
                                                                                                   orrhage; therefore, blood must be available in the
                                                                                                   room. Neonates can lose significant blood during
                                                                                                   access and sampling and may also require transfu-
                                                                                                   sion. Follow serial Hcts.

                                     Monitoring              Standard monitors, including          Respiratory monitoring can be performed via oxy-
                                                                                                   gen masks or nasal cannulae adapted to measure
                                                                                                   CO2 flow in a spontaneously breathing patient.
                                                                                                   Discuss with the cardiologist if A-line access is
                                                                                                   required. Frequently, the femoral artery is cannu-
                                                                                                   lated for the catheterization and may be available
                                                                                                   for use; However, access may be limited at criti-
                                                                                                   cal times (e.g. stenting or coiling), and therefore a
                                                             ± arterial line                       peripheral arterial line may be desirable. For cases
                                                             ± Foley catheter                      of long duration, consider Foley catheter placement.
                                                             ± NIRS                                Monitor temperature. Cerebral oximeter monitor-
                                                                                                   ing is recommended in single-ventricle and in other
                                                                                                   cyanotic lesions as pulse oximetry is a poor predic-
                                                                                                   tor of changes in cerebral saturation. Arterial line
                                                                                                   also plays an important role in patients with poor
                                                                                                   cardiac function and/or placement of melody valve.

                                     Positioning             3 pad pressure points                 Supine, arms may be flexed above head to allow
                                                                                                   fluoroscopy of chest. Adolescent patients are at
                                                                                                   risk of brachial plexus injury. Keep extension < 90°.
                                                             3 cover eyes                          All ECG leads and monitoring wires must be cleared
                                                                                                   from axilla and chest to allow fluoroscopy.

                                     Complications           Airway obstruction                    Rx: Airway support, oral/nasal airway, LMA. Intu-
                                                                                                   bate if necessary.
                                                             Aspiration                            Rx: Suction, secure airway if needed. Bronchodila-
                                                                                                   tors, H1, H2 blockers if needed. CXR. O2 monitor-
                                                                                                   ing. Admit if postop oxygen requirement persists.
                                                             Arrhythmias                           Determine etiology, whether hemodynamically sta-
                                                                                                   ble or not. Cardiovert/defibrillate/emergency drugs
                                                                                                   as necessary. Check electrolytes, ABG. Consult EP.
                                                             Hemorrhage (access site, rupture of   Rx: Fluid resuscitation with crystalloid, 5% albumin
                                                             vessels, tamponade)                   and/or blood; vasopressors as needed. Secure air-
                                                                                                   way, 100% FiO2. Check Hct.
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             Valvular incompetence (severe         Rx: Secure airway, volume resuscitation, vasopres-
            Procedures

                                                             regurgitation/annular rupture)        sor support, consult surgeon and proceed with
                                                                                                   emergent surgical repair if needed.
                                                             Hypoxemia                             Try to determine the cause. Check Hct in single-
                                                                                                   ventricle patients. Rx: Airway support; increase
                                                                                                   FiO2. Intubate and ventilate as needed.
                                                             Pulmonary hypertensive crisis         Avoid hypoxia, hypercarbia, acidosis, pain/agitation.
                                                                                                   Rx: FiO2 100%, deepen anesthetic if tolerated. Con-
                                                                                                   sider NO, systemic vasopressors.
                                                             Contrast reaction/anaphylaxis         Rx: Support airway, 100% FiO2, intubate if needed:
                                                                                                   phenylephrine, volume resuscitation, steroid, anti-
                                                                                                   histamine, H2 blocker.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Cardiac Catheterization and Electrophysiology                1549

                      Complications               Hypothermia                                 Especially neonates. Rx: Forced-air warming device,
                        (cont’d)                                                              heat lamp. Increase environmental temperature.
                                                  Air embolism                                Rx: 100% FiO2; identify and occlude source; Tren-
                                                                                              delenburg; fluid resuscitation; vasopressor support.
                                                                                              Aspirate air from central access if possible.
                                                  Positioning injury                          Especially brachial plexus injury. Careful documen-
                                                                                              tation, consult neurologist. Prevention = diligent
                                                                                              positioning is key.
                                                  Vascular thrombosis/stroke                  Support airway, 100% FiO2, intubate if needed; obtain
                                                                                              emergent brain CT; consult neuro/stroke team

                            POSTprocedure

                      Complications               Hematoma at access site
                                                  Ischemic limb
                                                  Emergence delirium
                                                  Pericardial tamponade
                                                  Corneal abrasion

                      Pain                        Postop analgesia usually managed with acetaminophen, fentanyl, morphine, or hydromor-
                        management                phone taking care to avoid hypoxia or hypercarbia. Access sites are commonly infiltrated
                                                  with local anesthetic by cardiologist.

                      Tests                       CXR, if indicated
                                                  TTE, if clinical picture is suggestive of tamponade

                     Suggested Readings
                        1. Abbas SM, Rashid A, Latif H: Sedation for children undergoing cardiac catheterization: a review of literature. J Pak Med Assoc
                           2012; 62:159–63.
                        2. Baker CM, McGowan FX Jr, Keane JF, et al: Pulmonary artery trauma due to balloon dilation: recognition, avoidance and
                           management. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000; 36(5):1684–90.
                        3. Benson LN, Nykanen D, Collison A: Radiofrequency perforation in the treatment of congenital heart disease. Catheter
                           Cardiovasc Interv 2002; 56(1):72–82.
                        4. Chessa M, Carminati M, Cao QL, et al: Transcatheter closure of congenital and acquired muscular ventricular septal defects
                           using the Amplatzer device. J Invasive Cardiol 2002; 14(6):322–7.
                        5. Diaz LK, Jones L: Sedating the child with congenital heart disease. Anesthesiol Clin 2009; 27:301–19.
                        6. Gaitan BD, Trentman TL, Fassett SL, et al: Sedation and analgesia in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory: a national
                           survey of electrophysiologists investigating the who, how, and why? J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2011; 25:647–59.
                        7. Grifka RD: Cardiac catheterization and angiography, eds. In: Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, Feltes TF, Moss & Adams’
                           Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents: Including the Fetus and Young Adults, 7th edition. Lippincott Williams
                           & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007
                        8. Hammer GB, Drover DR, Cao H, et al: The effects of dexmedetomidine on cardiac electrophysiology in children. Anesth
                           Analgesia 2008; 106:79–83.
                        9. Holzer RJ, Cheatham JP: Electrophysiologic therapeutic catheterization, eds. In: Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, Feltes TF,             Out-of-Operating Room
                           Moss & Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and Adolescents: Including the Fetus and Young Adults, 7th edition.
                                                                                                                                                                           Procedures

                           Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007.
                       10. Joe RR, Chen LQ: Anesthesia in the cardiac catheterization lab. Anesthesiol Clin N Am 2003; 21:639–51.
                       11. Jooste EH, Muhly WT, Ibinson JW, et al: Acute hemodynamic changes after rapid intravenous bolus dosing of dexmedetomidine
                           in pediatric heart transplant patients undergoing routine cardiac catheterization. Anesth Analgesia 2010; 111:1490–6.
                       12. Kaplan RF, Yang CI: Sedation and analgesia in pediatric patients for procedures outside the operating room. Anesthesiol Clin
                           N Am 2002; 20:181–94.
                       13. Koruk S, Mizrak A, Kaya Ugur B, et al: Propofol/dexmedetomidine and propofol/ketamine combinations for anesthesia in
                           pediatric patients undergoing transcatheter atrial septal defect closure: a prospective randomized study. Clin Therap 2010;
                           32:701–9.
                       14. Kugler JD: Electrophysiologic studies. In: Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, Feltes TF, eds. Moss & Adams’ Heart Disease
                           in Infants, Children, and Adolescents: Including the Fetus and Young Adults, 7th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                           Philadelphia: 2007.
                       15. Laussen PC: Sedation and anesthesia in cardiac procedures. Nadas’ Pediatric Cardiology, 2nd edition. In: Keane JF, Lock JE,
                           Fyler DC, eds. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2006, 291–302.

===== PAGE ? =====
1550   c h a p t e r 13.2     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                      16. Lock JE: Cardiac Catheterization. Nada’s Pediatric Cardiology, 2nd edition. In: Keane JF, Lock JE, Fyler DC, eds. Saunders
                                          Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2006, 213–50.
                                      17. Maron BJ, Shen WK, Link MS, et al: Efficacy of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators for the prevention of sudden death in
                                          patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Eng J Med 2000; 342(6):365–73.
                                      18. McCrindle BW, Blackstone EH, Williams WG, et al: Are outcomes of surgical versus transcatheter balloon valvotomy
                                          equivalent in neonatal critical aortic stenosis? Circulation 2001; 104(12 Suppl 1):1152–8.
                                      19. Mester R, Easley RB, Brady KM, et al: Monitored anesthesia care with a combination of ketamine and dexmedetomidine
                                          during cardiac catheterization. Am J Therapeutics 2008; 15:24–30.
                                      20. Munro HM, Tirotta CF, Felix DE, et al: Initial experience with dexmedetomidine for diagnostic and interventional cardiac
                                          catheterization in children. Paediatr Anaesth 2007; 17:109–12.
                                      21. Niksch A, Liberman L, Clapcich A, et al: Effects of remifentanil anesthesia on cardiac electrophysiologic properties in
                                          children undergoing catheter ablation of supraventricular tachycardia. Pediatr Cardiol 2010; 31:1079–82.
                                      22. Shields JA: Heart block and prolonged QTc interval following muscle relaxant reversal: A case report. AANA 2008; 76:41–5.
                                      23. Shook DC, Savage RM: Anesthesia in the cardiac catheterization laboratory and electrophysiology laboratory. Anesthesiol
                                          Clin 2009; 27:47–56.
                                      24. Tobias JD: Dexmedetomidine: applications in pediatric critical care and pediatric anesthesiology. Pediatr Criti Care Med
                                          2007; 8:115–31.
                                      25. Tobias JD, Gupta P, Naguib A, et al: Dexmedetomidine: applications for the pediatric patient with congenital heart disease.
                                          Pediatr Cardiol 2011; 32:1075–87.
                                      26. Tosun Z, Akin A, Guler G, et al: Dexmedetomidine-ketamine and propofol-ketamine combinations for anesthesia in
                                          spontaneously breathing pediatric patients undergoing cardiac catheterization. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2006; 20:515–9.
                                      27. Trentman TL, Fassett SL, Mueller JT, et al: Airway interventions in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory: a retrospective
                                          review. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2009; 23:841–5.
                                      28. Ulgey A, Aksu R, Bicer C, et al: Is the addition of dexmedetomidine to a ketamine-propofol combination in pediatric cardiac
                                          catheterization sedation useful? Pediatr Cardiol 2012; 33:770–4.
                                      29. Vogel M, Berger F, Dahnert I, et al: Treatment of atrial septal defects in symptomatic children aged less than 2 years of age
                                          using the Amplatzer septal occluder. Cardiol Young 2000; 10(5):534–7.
                                      30. von Ungern-Sternberg BS Boda K, Chambers NA, et al: Risk assessment for respiratory complications in paediatric anesthesia:
                                          a prospective cohort study. Lancet 2010; 376(9743):773–83.
                                      31. Williams GD, Maan H, Ramamoorthy C, et al: Perioperative complications in children with pulmonary hypertension
                                          undergoing general anesthesia with ketamine. Paediatr Anaest 2010; 20:28–37.

                                     Pediatric Oncologic Procedures
                                     Kristin Sun, Neyssa Marina, Rebecca Claure, Brenda Golianu
                                     Pediatric oncology patients represent a unique population, with a 5-yr survival rate for children with cancer now
                                     over 80%. These patients require anesthesia for a variety of procedures: diagnostic imaging, surgical resection,
                                     radiation therapy, central line placement, and multiple minor procedures for staging and intrathecal chemotherapy.
                                      The pediatric anesthesiologist is in the position of caring for these patients for long periods from initial diagnosis,
                                      through years of induction and maintenance therapy, and finishing with end of therapy procedures. More than in
                                      other patient populations, the anesthesiologist plays a critical role in a child’s experience over several years in the
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                      hospital environment.
            Procedures

                                     When patients first present for evaluation of possible malignancy, either solid organ tumors or hematologic cancers,
                                     they may undergo multiple imaging studies such as computed tomography scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis,
                                     bone scintigraphy, and magnetic resonance imaging scans. These studies are not painful, but require patients to be
                                     immobile for anywhere from a few minutes to over an hour. Sedation or general anesthesia is usually required, espe-
                                     cially in patients under 5 yr of age.

                                     For solid organ tumors of the brain, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and bone, pediatric patients may undergo daily doses of
                                     radiation therapy over the course of several weeks before or after resection. Although radiation therapy may only be
                                     a few minutes long, the specific anatomic dosing requires the patient to be immobile, again requiring multiple brief
                                     anesthetics. Solid organ tumors involve major surgical resection, or diagnostic tissue biopsy, either before or after
                                     concomitant radiation therapy or chemotherapy.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Oncologic Procedures         1551

                     In the initial evaluation of hematologic diseases, patients must undergo evaluation of bone marrow with bone mar-
                     row aspirates and/or biopsies. Involvement of the cerebrospinal fluid is evaluated with a diagnostic lumbar puncture
                     (LP). These patients then go on to require repeat bone marrow procedure and serial LPs for staging and for intrathe-
                     cal chemotherapy dosing when indicated. Approximately 50% of leukemia patients will develop CNS disease without
                     intrathecal prophylaxis. Patients may be evaluated and counseled to have these procedures under conscious seda-
                     tion, but most children under 12 yr of age require a brief general anesthetic for each procedure.

                     In addition to the above diagnostic and treatment procedures, the majority of pediatric oncology patients undergo
                     placement of indwelling central venous catheters, as percutaneous intravenous central catheters (PICC), Hickman or
                     Broviac catheters, or portacaths. With the exception of PICC placements, most of these catheters are inserted under
                     anesthesia and in a sterile operating room environment. When full therapy is completed, central v enous line removal
                     again requires sedation or general anesthesia.

                            PREPROCEDURE
                     Pediatric oncology patients are followed very closely during their treatment, undergoing at least monthly physical
                     exams to evaluate for side effects of therapy to determine whether proceeding with the prescribed therapy is indi-
                     cated. When these patients require invasive procedures, it is essential to work with the primary oncology team to
                     evaluate whether the requested procedure is elective or urgent. All patients undergo routine periodic blood counts
                     to determine the safety of continuing chemotherapy dosing. Occasionally a procedure, such as lumbar puncture for
                     intrathecal chemotherapy, may be postponed if blood counts have dropped too low. It is important to remember that
                     the toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs may affect every organ in the body beyond the target cancer tissue.
                     A thorough preanesthetic history and physical exam should be performed for all major and minor cases and the
                     standard NPO protocol applied (see p. D-1).

                      Respiratory and          Major surgical procedures for patients with symptoms of upper respiratory infection (eg., cough,
                        airway                 fever) are postponed unless there are circumstances (CNS disease, bone marrow relapse) that re-
                                               quire the treatment to proceed. In those circumstances, LPs and BMAs can be performed either
                                               with sedation or with the use of local anesthesia. A number of chemotherapeutic agents have
                                               been associated with pulmonary toxicity: bleomycin (2–5%), BNCU (20–50%), busulfan (2.5–
                                               11.5%), cyclophosphamide (rare), and methotrexate (rare). The use of these agents requires
                                               follow-up evaluation to make certain the patient is able to proceed with his/her procedure.
                                               Patients who present with an anterior mediastinal mass may present with signs and symp-
                                               toms of superior vena cava compression, or with superior mediastinal syndrome with tra-
                                               cheal compression. It is critical to recognize and evaluate patients with a mediastinal mass
                                               prior to inducing general anesthesia. The adolescent patient presenting with a new diag-
                                               nosis of Hodgkin’s or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma or acute lymphoblastic leukemia should
                                               be carefully assessed for the possibility of a mediastinal mass. Younger patients may also
                                               present with symptoms of anterior mediastinal compression. Careful preoperative evalua-
                                               tion should be made for respiratory symptoms or compromise, as well as obtaining a chest
                                               x-ray, and possibly even chest CT scan. Careful consideration should be given to performing
                                               diagnostic procedures under minimal sedation, since general anesthesia in these patients
                                               can result in significant cardiorespiratory complications and fatality. Preoperative treatment
                                                                                                                                                           Out-of-Operating Room
                                               with irradiation or corticosteroids may reduce tumor size; however, this may also change
                                               tissue pathology. Key features in general anesthetic management, if absolutely required, are
                                                                                                                                                                 Procedures

                                               the maintenance of spontaneous ventilation, no paralysis, having a rigid and flexible bron-
                                               choscope immediately available, and preparing for postoperative ICU monitoring.
                                               Routine airway assessment is essential. Chemotherapy may result in severe, painful oral
                                               mucositis, or stomatitis. Patients are also more susceptible to infectious viral oral lesions,
                                               such as herpetic lesions, and may require isolation. Frequent URI may occur due to im-
                                               mune compromise. Fever, loose cough, wheezing, or coarse BS requires evaluation and
                                               likely postponement of any procedures.
                                               Tests: All pediatric oncology patients undergo weekly complete blood counts to evalu-
                                               ate for toxicity from therapy. In addition, patients who have received any of the agents
                                               associated with pulmonary toxicity undergo pulmonary function tests at regular intervals.
                                               Although some chemotherapy agents are associated with pulmonary toxicity, the cumu-
                                               lative doses of those agents are such that most patients are asymptomatic. CXR may be
                                               indicated to evaluate upper respiratory symptoms.

===== PAGE ? =====
1552   c h a p t e r 13.2   Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Cardiovascular          Anticancer treatment can produce a wide range of cardiac toxicity. Anthracycline-induced
                                                             cardiomyopathy, while rare, can lead to significant cardiovascular compromise. This com-
                                                             plication is associated with the use of cumulative doses > 300 mg/m.
                                                             Cardiomyopathy is insidious in origin and most commonly presents many years following
                                                             treatment with doxorubicin, daunorubicin, or amacrine. The use of high doses of radio-
                                                             therapy is also associated with cardiac complications, including constrictive pericarditis,
                                                             atherosclerosis, and early myocardiac infarction. Signs of CV toxicity may include SOB,
                                                             ECG changes, rhythm disturbances, pericarditis, or CHF.
                                                             Preoperative hemodynamic status needs to be evaluated. Patients on steroid therapy may
                                                             develop steroid-induced hypertension. It is important to obtain a careful history of any
                                                             antihypertensive medication, especially a record of medications taken on the day of the
                                                              procedure or surgery. Conversely, patients who are dehydrated or anemic may b         ecome
                                                             significantly hypotensive after induction of general anesthesia. These patients may require
                                                             preoperative hydration, and vasoactive medication should be available for intraoperative
                                                             use. Patients actively receiving chemotherapy may also have 3rd spacing and may need
                                                              aggressive hydration and/or pressor support.
                                                               Tests: Patients receiving any agents associated with cardiac toxicity are monitored at yearly
                                                               interval with echocardiograms and electrocardiograms. These tests do not need to be
                                                               performed routinely prior to a procedure requiring general anesthesia unless history and
                                                               physical exam suggest a change in the patient’s clinical condition.

                                     Hematologic             Bone marrow suppression occurs with all cytotoxic drugs. The anesthesiologist and
                                                             oncologist need to work together to evaluate anemia and thrombocytopenia. Due to
                                                              myelosuppression, anemia is common in oncology patients. In assessing the degree of ane-
                                                               mia in a given patient, it is important to assess his or her overall clinical appearance and
                                                               hemodynamic compensation. A very low hemoglobin level < 6–7 increases the patient’s
                                                               risk of significant BP instability during general anesthesia. For the procedure planned, can
                                                               the patienttolerate the stress from anesthesia, and is there further blood loss expected
                                                               during the procedures? Patient assessment with expectations for the surgical/diagnostic
                                                               procedure will determine whether red blood cell or platelet transfusion is required preop-
                                                               eratively. If no transfusion is planned and the patient is anemic, prepare fluid replacement,
                                                               colloid (e.g., albumin), and/or vasoactive support.
                                                               Tests: Complete blood counts are performed once to twice a week in all pediatric oncol-
                                                               ogy patients. These tests help determine whether continuing with the prescribed therapy is
                                                               indicated. Baseline platelet and hemoglobin counts need to be measured before proceeding
                                                               with lumbar punctures and bone marrow aspirates.

                                     Neurologic              Peripheral neuropathies due to vincristine, vinblastine, cisplatin, and procarbazine may
                                                             be present. Patient should be carefully positioned and padded. These patients may require
                                                             additional attention to preop pain management and anxiolysis, with supplemental intraop
                                                             and postop pain control.

                                     GI/Hepatic              Many chemotherapy agents cause significant nausea and vomiting. Patients may present
                                                             with these symptoms preop or may be dehydrated due to vomiting and poor fluid intake.
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                                             Hepatotoxicity may also occur from chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Asparaginase can
            Procedures

                                                             induce severe pancreatitis. 3 LFT, Amylase, Lipase.

                                     Endocrine               Most cancer patients are treated with corticosteroids at some point in their therapy. Ste-
                                                             roids can lead to weight gain, suppression of the stress response, and rarer complications
                                                             such as psychosis. In addition, steroid-induced hyperglycemia may require pre- and post-
                                                             operative glucose monitoring and insulin therapy.

===== PAGE ? =====
Pediatric Oncologic Procedures          1553

                      Premedication           For major procedures, individualized premedication is recommended. Since oncology
                                              patients often have an indwelling intravenous catheter, or are familiar with having veni-
                                              punctures and iv placed, iv induction is frequently used. Intravenous midazolam may be
                                              easily administered when required for anxiolysis. Some patients may require premedica-
                                              tion with oral midazolam or ativan, if they do not have iv access. However, many radiology
                                              and minor oncology procedures may be performed in an less restrictive environment, such
                                              as a procedure room, where the parents may stay with their child through induction. For
                                              the very anxious patient, or a child who has undergone significant emotional trauma in the
                                              hospital environment, preoperative counseling with a Child Life Specialist or psychologist
                                              can be very important and helpful in alleviating fears and helping the child adjust to the
                                              stress of frequent hospital/procedure visits.

                           INTRAPROCEDURE
                     Anesthetic technique: For major surgical procedures, GETA management is indicated. Below are recommenda-
                     tions for pediatric oncology patients undergoing minor procedures.

                     Procedures such as lumbar punctures and bone marrow aspirates are usually short, 10–20 min. Adolescent patients
                     may be evaluated by their provider or the anesthesiologist for possible conscious sedation. Younger patients usually
                     require brief general anesthesia—inhalation or intravenous.

                      Induction               For lumbar punctures in the patient without iv access, a brief inhalation anesthetic may
                                              be adequate. However, since most patients will have iv access, intravenous anesthesia with
                                              propofol provides adequate anesthesia, causes less nausea, and allows a rapid recovery.
                                              Standard protocol should include meticulous sterile technique in using the central venous
                                              line and confirmation of blood aspiration and catheter flow, both prior to beginning induc-
                                              tion and after repositioning the patient in a lateral decubitus position. On positioning a
                                              patient for lumbar puncture in the left lateral position, it is possible to dislodge the porta-
                                              cath needle, with resulting extravasation of fluid or propofol into the subcutaneous tissue.

                      Maintenance             Intermittent boluses of propofol 0.5–1 mg/kg may be used or an infusion of 200 mcg/
                                              kg/min. N2O or low-dose sevoflurane may be added. For BMA, add fentanyl 1 mcg/kg or
                                              hydromorphone 1–2 mcg/kg for postop pain management.
                                               The provider performing the procedures infiltrates the area with lidocaine. For Broviac cathe-
                                               ter removals, heparin must be removed from the catheter and discarded before use for induc-
                                               tion. A sufficient bolus of propofol (e.g., 0.5–1 mg/kg) must be given just prior to pulling the
                                               catheter. Additional iv usually is not warranted because the procedure is normally ≤ 10 min,
                                               but may be desirable if postop pain medication is anticipated. Occasionally, the catheter may
                                               break during attempted removal, and the surgeon will have to make a skin incision to allow
                                               for removal of the internal fragment. In such cases, a peripheral iv may be inserted quickly to
                                               facilitate administration of additional propofol, or mask anesthesia may be given. If the SpO2
                                              decreases, blow-by O2 with gentle head and neck positioning are generally sufficient.
                                              Allow child to awaken in procedure room. Ondansetron 0.15 mg/kg for patients receiving                       Out-of-Operating Room
                      Emergence
                                                                                                                                                                 Procedures

                                              intrathecal chemotherapy during their lumbar puncture. Avoid dexamethasone, as steroids
                                              may be part of the patient’s chemotherapy protocol or may precipitate tumor lysis syndrome.

                      Blood and fluid         Patients may require blood or            It is important to be aware of patients where fluid
                         requirements         factor supplementation prior to or      restriction may be required, such as in a recent bone
                                               during procedure based on preop-        marrow transplant patient, or patient with graft vs host
                                               erative laboratory values.              disease, who may have complications of fluid overload.
                                                                                       Sodium bicarbonate infusion is common during
                                                                                       chemotherapy and should be continued during an-
                                                                                       esthesia when possible.

                      Monitoring              Standard monitors

===== PAGE ? =====
1554   c h a p t e r 13.2     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Positioning                 Lateral decubitus (lumbar puncture)
                                                                 Supine, seated or prone (bone mar-
                                                                 row aspiration, biopsy)
                                                                 Supine (Broviac)

                                     Complications               Airway obstruction                          Head and neck repositioning, jaw thrust.
                                                                 Retained central venous catheter             may require open surgical procedure.

                                     Postprocedure               Lumbar punctures are not generally painful, whereas bone marrow aspirations and biop-
                                       pain                      sies can be. Preoperative care includes the application of EMLA cream to the LP or bone
                                       management                marrow site, as well as having the oncologist infiltrate with lidocaine after induction.
                                                                 For pain management low-dose fentanyl 1 mcg/kg, or hydromorphone 2 mcg/kg may
                                                                 be used, and repeated in the PACU if needed. Check with the oncologist before ad-
                                                                 ministering acetaminophen. Acetaminophen is not routinely given for pain prophylaxis
                                                                 due to the possibility of masking a fever. Acetaminophen is not given unless needed
                                                                 and should never be given as a rectal suppository to the immunocompromised patient.
                                                                 Some patients may have chronic or acute pain syndromes due to tumor bone pain, or as
                                                                 a side effect from chemotherapy. These patients need to be evaluated on an individual
                                                                 basis for their pain management. After lumbar punctures, the patient should remain in
                                                                 a horizontal position for at least 30 min to prevent post–dural puncture headache.

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Anghelescu DL, Burgoyne LL, Liu T, et al: Clinical and diagnostic imaging findings predict anesthetic complications in
                                          children presenting with malignant mediastinal masses. Pediatr Anesth 2007; 17:1090–8.
                                       2. Anghelescu DL, Burgoyne LL, Liu W, et al: Safe anesthesia for radiotherapy in pediatric oncology: St. Jude children’s research
                                          hospital experience, 2004–2006. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2008; 71:491–7.
                                       3. Christensen J, Fatchett D: Promoting parental use of distraction and relaxation in pediatric oncology patients during invasive
                                          procedures. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2002; 19(4):127–32.
                                       4. Culshaw V, Yule M, Lawson R: Considerations for anaesthesia in children with haematological malignancy undergoing short
                                          procedures. Paediatr Anaesth 2003; 13:375–83.
                                       5. Einaudi S, Bertorello N, Masera N, et al: Adrenal axis function after high-dose steroid therapy for childhood acute
                                          lymphoblastic leukemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2008; 50:537–41.
                                       6. Evans P, Chisholm D: Anaesthesia and paediatric oncology. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 2008; 19:50–8.
                                       7. Klein SM, Hauser GJ, Anderson BD, et al: Comparison of intermittent versus continuous infusion of propofol for elective
                                          oncology procedures in children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2003; 4(1):78–82.
                                       8. Kurosawa S, Kato M: Anesthetics, immune cells, and immune responses. J Anesth 2008; 22:263–77.
                                       9. Kushner BH, Yeh SD, Kramer K, et al: Impact of metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy on assessing response of high-risk
                                          neuroblastoma to dose-intensive induction chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2003; 21:1082–6.
                                      10. Latham GJ, Greenberg RS: Anesthetic considerations for the pediatric oncology patient—part 1: a review of antitumor
                                          therapy. Pediatric Anesthesia 2010; 20:295–304.
                                      11. Latham GJ, Greenberg RS: Anesthetic considerations for the pediatric oncology patient—part 2: systems-based approach to
                                          anesthesia. Pediatric Anesthesia 2010; 20:396–420.
                                      12. Latham GJ, Greenberg RS: Anesthetic considerations for the pediatric oncology patient—part 3: pain, cognitive dysfunction,
                                          and preoperative evaluation. Pediatric Anesthesia 2010; 20:479–89.
                                      13. Schrappe M, Camitta B, Pui CH, et al: Long-term results of large prospective trials in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
                                          Leukemia 2000; 14:2193–4.
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                      14. Schrappe M, Reiter A, Ludwig WD, et al: Improved outcome in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia despite reduced
                                          use of anthracyclines and cranial radiotherapy: results of trial ALL-BFM 90 [In Process Citation]. Blood 2000; 95:3310–22.
            Procedures

                                      15. Shimokawa S, Watanabe S, Sakasegawa K: Fatal complication due to a mediastinal tumor. Ann Thoracic Surg 2000; 70:340–1.

                                     Upper/Lower GI Endoscopy
                                     Ann Ming Yeh, William Berquist, Rebecca E. Claure, and Brenda Golianu
                                     Upper and lower endoscopy allows for accurate diagnosis and treatment of gastrointestinal diseases. Diagnostic indi-
                                     cations for upper endoscopy include dysphagia; odynophagia; persistent vomiting; abdominal pain with weight loss/
                                     anorexia; acid peptic disease, dyspepsia, and heartburn despite medical therapy; hematemesis or melena; obtaining
                                     samples or biopsies; and diagnosis of infection or disease (graft versus host disease, malignancy) especially in an
                                     immunocompromised patient. Indications for colonoscopy include evaluation of gross or occult bleeding; symptom

===== PAGE ? =====
Upper/Lower GI Endoscopy          1555

                     evaluation of new-onset constipation or unexplained diarrhea or abdominal pain; screening or surveillance for inflam-
                     matory bowel disease; and screening for colorectal neoplasia. Therapeutic indications for gastrointestinal endoscopy
                     include esophageal dilation, foreign body removal, sclerotherapy or banding of esophageal varices, hemostasis with
                     directed thermal or injection therapy, removal or change out of GJ tubes, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube
                     placement, decompression of sigmoid volvulus or megacolon; polypectomy; PEG placement; removal or change of
                     gastrostomy or GJ tubes and decompression of sigmoid volvulus or megacolon. Children presenting for endoscopy
                     may have congenital and acquired abnormalities of the GI tract. Examples include repaired tracheoesophageal fistula
                     (TEF) with esophageal dysmotility or strictures, ingestion of a caustic material, and presence of a foreign body.

                     Many endoscopy procedures are done with sedation only. Requests for anesthesia are dependent on the gastroenter-
                     ologist’s preference, as well as the severity of the patient’s underlying illnesses. All patients must receive a complete
                     preanesthesia H&P and follow the same NPO protocol used for surgery (see Appendix D). Patients undergoing colo-
                     noscopy require bowel preparation to have the colon free of solid stool for adequate visualization. Common bowel
                     preparation regimens include a combination of magnesium citrate, biscodyl, and polyethylene glycol.

                     Absolute contraindications of upper and lower endoscopy include suspected perforation and peritonitis in a toxic patient.
                     Relative contraindications include coagulopathy, neutropenia, fulminant colitis, bowel obstruction and toxic dilation
                     with increased risk of perforation, torrential colonic bleeding, poor bowel preparation, and cardiopulmonary instability.

                     Overall complication rates of upper GI endoscopy are generally rare, with complications estimated at 0.3% risk of
                     bleeding following an EGD with biopsy and risk of perforation in < 0.3% of cases. Hypoxia secondary to sedation,
                     hematoma, missed lesions, and infections are also potential infrequent complications. Complications of colonoscopy
                     occur in < 2% of patients, with bleeding and perforation reported in < 0.3% and 0.3%, respectively.

                             ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                      Gastrointestinal         Carefully evaluate for esophageal dysfunction and Sx of GERD. The stomach and bowel will
                                               be insufflated with air during the procedure, possibly increasing the likelihood of reflux.

                      Laboratory               As indicated from H&P. Hct if GI bleeding

                      Premedication            If inhalation induction planned, midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po for anxious children. Con-
                                               sider midazolam for younger children requiring an iv induction (1–2 mg).

                           INTRAPROCEDURE
                     Anesthetic technique: Upper GI endoscopy for esophageal dilation, foreign body removal, severe GERD, gastroin-
                     testinal bleeding, and banding/sclerotherapy of esophageal varices requires GETA. For children ≥ 2, with no contraindi-
                     cations, supplemental O2 via nasal cannula, spontaneous respiration, and propofol infusion can be considered. Children
                     ≤ 2 have a higher incidence of complications when not intubated due to the relatively large endoscope. Complications
                     include partial airway obstruction, tracheal compression, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and desaturation. Placement
                     of the endoscope in the mouth precludes the ability to use a mask or LMA. For lower GI endoscopy (e.g., colonoscopy),
                     supplemental O2 via nasal cannula or mask, spontaneous respiration, and propofol infusion may be preferable.
                                                                                                                                                          Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                      Induction                If rapid-sequence indication indicated, iv catheter placed prior to induction. Proceed with
                                               preoxygenation, cricoid pressure, propofol (2–3 mg/kg), and succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg)
                                               or rocuronium (1 mg/kg). ETT should be well secured to the side of the mouth.
                                               If risk of aspiration relatively low, a standard pediatric iv or mask induction is appropriate
                                               (see Appendix D).

                      Maintenance              GETA with inhalational agents or iv infusion of propofol (100–250 mcg/kg/min), ± remifen-
                                               tanil (0.05–0.10 mcg/kg/min). Alternatively, GA/sedation may be continued with supple-
                                               mental O2 via nasal cannula, spontaneous respiration, and infusion of propofol (100–250
                                               mcg/kg/min), ± remifentanil (0.05–0.10 mcg/kg/min). If intubated, careful observation
                                               and/or holding the ETT prevents inadvertent extubation during removal of the endoscope.
                                               If spontaneously breathing, careful attention is needed to observe for breath holding, laryn-
                                               gospasm and/or desaturation.

===== PAGE ? =====
1556   c h a p t e r 13.2     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Emergence                   If intubated, extubate awake. Emergence in procedure room. Patients usually transported
                                                                 to and recovered in PACU.

                                     Blood and fluid             No blood loss.
                                        requirements             IV: 22 or 24 ga × 1
                                                                 NS/LR @ maintenance

                                     Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see Appendix D).

                                     Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   Lateral decubitus for upper and lower endoscopy
                                                                 3 eyes

                                     Complications               Airway obstruction
                                                                 Hypoxemia 2° gastric insufflation
                                                                 Inadvertent extubation                      Due to endoscopist working in the mouth and
                                                                                                             pharynx
                                                                 Pulmonary aspiration
                                                                 GI perforation

                                          POSTprocedure

                                     Pain                        Acetaminophen (35–40 mg/kg pr, or 10–15 mg/kg po 10 mg/kg iv), hydromorphone
                                       management                (0.01–0.015 mg/kg iv) or morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv)

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. Dilos BM. Anesthesia for pediatric airway endoscopy and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Int Anaesthesiol Clin 2009; 47(3):
                                          55–62.
                                       2. Disma N, Astuto M, Rizzo G, et al: Propofol sedation with fentanyl or midazolam during oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy
                                          in children. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2005; 22(11):848–52.
                                       3. Hussein SA. Anesthesia for pediatric endoscopies. Int Anaesthesiol Clin 2004; 44(1):81–93.
                                       4. Koh JL, Black DD, Leatherman IK, et al: Experience with an anesthesiologist interventional model for endoscopy in a pediatric
                                          hospital. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2001; 33(3):314–8.
                                       5. Schwartz DA, Connelly NR, Theroux CA, et al: Gastric contents in children presenting for upper endoscopy. Anesth Analg
                                          1998; 87(4):757–60.
                                       6. Sury M, Smith JH: Deep sedation and minimal anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth 2008; 18(l):18–24.

                                     Cross-Sectional Imaging (CT, MRI)
      Out-of-Operating Room
            Procedures

                                     Rebecca E. Claure and Brenda Golianu
                                          PREPROCEDURE
                                     A complete preanesthetic H&P should be performed in all cases and the usual NPO protocol followed (see Appen-
                                     dix D). For MRI, thorough questioning regarding potentially ferromagnetic implants (neurostimulators, cochlear
                                     implants, pacemakers, surgical clips, infusion pumps, etc.) is critical. Direct questions regarding suitability of implants
                                     for scanning to radiologist.

                                     Respiratory                 Procedures for patients with Sx of URI (nasal congestion, cough, fever) are usually post-
                                                                 poned for 3–4 wk unless the study is urgent. If Sx are minor, the study may proceed.

===== PAGE ? =====
Cross-Sectional Imaging (CT, MRI)         1557

                      Cardiovascular          Pacemakers usually contraindicated. Prosthetic heart valves may be contraindicated (iden-
                                              tify the type of valve present and consult with radiologist). Fresh surgical clips (e.g., recent
                                              PDA ligation) may also represent a contraindication for MRI.

                      Neurologic              Head CT or MRI may be performed in patients with seizure disorders or brain tumors.
                                              Review seizure meds and 3 serum levels if appropriate. Recent drug levels may not be
                                               necessary in children with well-controlled or stable seizure disorders. If ↑ ICP or ↓ in-
                                              tracranial compliance are present (e.g., 2° tumors or hydrocephalus), the anesthesia plan
                                              should include tracheal intubation with controlled ventilation. Metal surgical clips or coils
                                              are usually contraindications for MRI. Children with head trauma may have concurrent
                                              C-spine injuries.

                      Laboratory              As indicated from H&P. Usually none required.

                      Premedication           If inhalation induction planned, midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po for anxious children. If iv
                                              induction is planned, apply topical anesthesia (see Appendix D).

                           INTRAPROCEDURE
                     Unique considerations for MRI: See Adult Out-of-OR Procedures, p. 1517.

                     Anesthetic technique: CT scans—With current scanners, many studies can be completed in less than 10 min.
                     Each set of data takes 2–3 min to collect, allowing many children to complete scans without any sedation. In some
                     institutions, children undergo noninvasive CT scans with sedation by radiology personnel. For more complex cases,
                     sedation/GA is provided by an anesthesiologist. Most commonly, noninvasive CT scans are performed with inhala-
                     tion anesthesia via mask or with a continuous infusion of propofol (100–250 mcg/kg/min). For patients undergo-
                     ing invasive CT-guided procedures (needle biopsy, placement of drainage tubes, such as thoracostomy tube, etc.),
                     GETA is usually performed. Techniques include inhalational anesthesia and/or continuous infusion of propofol
                     (100–200 mcg/kg/min), and remifentanil (0.05–0.10 mcg/kg/min).

                     MRI—MRI requires GA more often than noninvasive CT because prolonged immobility is required for up to
                     1–2 h. Options include inhalational anesthesia with an MRI compatible anesthesia machine or continuous propofol
                     infusion with an MRI compatible infusion pump. Hypothermia frequently occurs in small children. The cooling fan
                     for the magnet can sometimes be turned off to decrease heat loss (discuss with MRI technician). One blanket over
                     patient is usually permissible. The iv, airway circuit, and monitors require extensions. Ferromagnetic objects in the
                     MRI environment are a hazard. Objects can be propelled toward the magnet with sufficient speed and force to result
                     in serious or fatal injury to the patient and/or health care provider.

                      Induction               Standard pediatric mask or iv induction (see Appendix D) can be accomplished in the CT
                                              scanner room or in a special induction area outside the MRI scanner. After induction and
                                              stabilization of the airway, the patient and all personnel entering the MRI scanner should
                                               undergo a second check for removal of metal objects and equipment. Once check com-
                                               pleted, transport patient into scanner and resume monitoring.
                                                                                                                                                          Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                      Maintenance             GA continued with supplemental O2 via nasal cannula, spontaneous respiration, and
                                              infusion of propofol (100–250 mcg/kg/min). In children with an LMA or ETT, mainte-
                                              nance with inhalational agent or propofol infusion. Typically, these patients do not require
                                              muscle relaxants, and spontaneous breathing is appropriate unless controlled ventilation
                                              is required to treat ↑ ICP, or for protocols involving breath holding for prolonged periods
                                              of time (e.g., several minutes for abdominal scans). Most infusion pumps need to remain
                                              a specific distance from the MRI scanner. The appropriate distance is dependent on the
                                              degree of shielding of each particular magnet. Adequate ear protection should be routinely
                                              used during MRI.

                      Emergence               Transport MRI patient back to induction area for emergence so that airway equipment is
                                              readily available. Patients transported to and recovered in PACU.

===== PAGE ? =====
1558   c h a p t e r 13.2     Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                     Blood and fluid             No blood loss.
                                        requirements             IV, if required: 22 or 24 ga × 1
                                                                 NS/LR @ maintenance

                                     Monitoring                  Standard MRI-compatible moni-              For infants, use a child-size NIBP cuff on the leg.
                                                                 tors (see p. D-1 for discussion of
                                                                 monitoring considerations).

                                     Positioning                 Ear protection necessary
                                                                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                                 3 eyes

                                     Complications               Airway obstruction                         Repositioning, nasal or oral airway.
                                                                 Hypothermia                                See adult MRI Unique Considerations and Compli-
                                                                                                            cations, p. 1517.
                                                                 Burn injury                                From inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter
                                                                                                            probe or EKG. Avoid coiling of wires and use only
                                                                 IV contrast reaction                       MRI-compatible monitors.
                                                                 Hearing loss (MRI)

                                          POSTprocedure

                                     Pain                        Noninvasive procedures are painless.
                                       management                Acetaminophen (35–40 mg/kg pr, 10–15 mg/kg po, or 10 mg/kg iv), hydromorphone
                                                                 (0.01–0.015 mg/kg iv) or morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg iv) as appropriate for invasive
                                                                 procedures

                                     Suggested Readings
                                       1. De Sanctis Briggs V: Magnetic resonance imaging under sedation in newborns and infants: a study of 640 cases using
                                          sevoflurane. Paediatr Anaesth 2005; 15(1):9–15.
                                       2. Gregory GA, ed: Pediatric Anesthesia, 4th edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2002, 809–18.
                                       3. Motoyama EK, Davis PJ, eds: Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 7th edition. Mosby Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2006,
                                          844–8, 851–3.
                                       4. Serafini G, Zadra N: Anaesthesia for MRI in the pediatric patient. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008; 21(4):499–503.
                                       5. Usher AG, Kearney RA, Tsui B: Propofol total intravenous anesthesia for MRI in children. Paediatr Anaesth 2005; 15(1): 23–8.

                                     Surgical Considerations for ECMO
                                     PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                     Gary Hartman and Claudia Mueller
      Out-of-Operating Room
            Procedures

                                     Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) for prolonged periods (3–21 d) allows cardiopulmonary support for
                                     newborns and children with reversible respiratory failure. The most common indications are meconium aspiration and
                                     pulmonary HTN associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. The procedure is performed in the NICU with OR
                                     techniques. Patients are given anticoagulants prior to cannulation. Subsequently, repair of the diaphragmatic hernia
                                     also may be performed in the NICU on ECMO support before decannulation (Fig. 13.2-3 shows ECMO schematic).
                                     The potential detrimental effects of the diaphragmatic repair on respiratory function can be managed with increased
                                     circuit flow. ECMO also has been helpful in some newborns with cardiopulmonary failure following correction of
                                     congenital cardiac defects. Vascular access is accomplished with one (venovenous) or two (venoarterial) cannulas.
                                     The IJ vein is cannulated in both methods with the tip of the cannula in the right atrium. In venoarterial ECMO, the
                                     common carotid artery is used with the tip of the cannula at the aortic arch. The wound is closed around the can-
                                     nulas, which are secured to the infant’s scalp.
                                     Usual preop diagnosis: Meconium aspiration; diaphragmatic hernia

===== PAGE ? =====
Surgical Considerations for ECMO      1559

                                   Figure 13.2-3. ECMO circuit illustrating veno-arterial cannulation. Venous blood
                                   is withdrawn by gravity through a servoregulator to prevent pump from actively
                                   siphoning venous return. A pump delivers blood back to the arterial cannula after it
                                   passes through the membrane oxygenator and heat exchanger. Venous return is from
                                   the right atrium, whereas arterial infusion is into the aortic arch in double-cannula
                                   (venoarterial) or right atrium (venovenous) techniques. (Reproduced with permission
                                   from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, Vol I, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                   Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                        ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                        Position                    Supine
                                                                                                                                                          Out-of-Operating Room
                        Incision                    Right neck incision; subcostal for hernia repair
                                                                                                                                                                Procedures

                        Special instrumentation     ECMO circuit (Fig. 13.2-3)

                        Unique considerations       Anticoagulation

                        Antibiotics                 Broad spectrum based on underlying condition

                        Surgical time               1–2 h

                        Closing considerations      Assess for changes in ventilation (e.g., PIP, pre- and postductal ABG); assess hemostasis.

                        EBL                         > 5–10 mL/kg

                        Postop care                 Paralysis maintained; fentanyl infusion @ 2–4 mcg/kg/h

===== PAGE ? =====
1560   c h a p t e r 13.2    Out-of-Operating Room Procedures—Pediatric

                                       ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                       Mortality                   Based on underlying conditions

                                       Morbidity                   Respiratory failure
                                                                   Sepsis

                                       Pain score                  6–7

                                       ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                       Age range               Primarily neonatal with increasing use in older children

                                       Male:Female             1–2:1

                                       Incidence               1:4000 live births

                                       Etiology                Unknown

                                       Associated              For diaphragmatic hernia: congenital heart disease (15%); renal anomalies; intestinal atresia;
                                         conditions            CNS abnormalities

                                     ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT FOR SURGICAL
                                     PROCEDURES UNDER ECMO
                                     Manchula Navaratnam and Chandra Ramamoorthy
                                     ECMO has become a standard therapy for refractory neonatal and pediatric cardiorespiratory failure. Over the past
                                     2 decades, the indications for ECMO have changed. The use of ECMO for neonatal respiratory failure peaked in
                                     the early 90, but its use has now decreased with the development of alternative strategies such as surfactant, high-
                                     frequency oscillation, and inhaled nitric oxide. In contrast, pediatric and cardiac indications have continued to in-
                                     crease including the use of ECMO for cardiopulmonary arrest (ECPR) refractory to standard CPR management. Im-
                                     proved patient outcomes with ECMO have been achieved by combining new technologies with refined management
                                     strategies and improved training of personnel.
                                     Anesthesiologists may find themselves encountering an increasing number of neonatal and pediatric patients on
                                     ECMO support for various surgical procedures and imaging studies. Successful management of these patients in-
                                     cludes meticulous planning, comprehensive teamwork, communication, and attention to detail. Intrahospital trans-
                                     port of these patients often requires multiple personnel from various medical specialties, and therefore, it is impor-
                                     tant to elect a team leader prior to transport and to allocate specific tasks (e.g., protection of ECMO cannulae) in
                                     order to avoid any confusion or conflict.
      Out-of-Operating Room

                                     The delivery of anesthetic agents can be via a TIVA technique or a combination of intravenous and inhalation agents.
            Procedures

                                     The plastic components of the bypass circuit can sequester varying amounts of the intravenous agents, especially
                                     fentanyl, altering the plasma levels and resulting in unpredictable hemodynamic changes. Volatile anesthetics are
                                     not routinely available on ECMO circuits due to difficulties with scavenging. Anesthetic agents cause preload and
                                     afterload changes and therefore additional volume (blood products and colloids) and vasoactive agents should be
                                     readily available in order to maintain adequate filling and blood pressure.
                                     It is important to keep in mind that altering the surgical table height will have an impact on the venous return to the ECMO
                                     circuit (passive gravity-assisted drainage); hence, the perfusionist must be informed before undertaking this maneuver.
                                     Diaphragmatic hernia repair is the most common noncardiac procedure undertaken on ECMO support. ECMO
                                     therapy protects the pulmonary alveoli from ventilator-associated barotrauma and oxygen toxicity, while maintain-
                                     ing tissue oxygenation. Prior to surgery, a trial period off bypass is used to assess the adequacy of conventional

===== PAGE ? =====
Anesthetic Management for Surgical Procedures Under ECMO                     1561

                     ventilation independent of ECMO. If the neonate is unable to be weaned, then the surgery occurs on full ECMO sup-
                     port, ACT is maintained at 160–200 sec by the addition of heparin to the ECMO circuit. The potential detrimental
                     effects of diaphragmatic repair on respiratory function can be managed with increased circuit flow.
                     Monitoring includes heart rate, arterial blood pressure, temperature, pump flow rate with frequent ABGs and VBGs.
                     The majority of practitioners employ VA cannulations for ECMO support (see Fig. 13.2-3) although some centers
                     prefer-VV ECMO support if hypoxemia is the primary indication.

                     Suggested Readings
                        1. American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Surgery; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn,
                           Lally KP, Engle W: Postdischarge follow-up of infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Pediatrics 2008; 121(3):627–32.
                        2. ECLS Registry Report: International Summary, ECMO Registry of the Extracorporeal Life Support Organisation (ELSO). Ann
                           Arbor, MI, USA, January 2012.
                        3. Lequier LJ: Extracorporeal life support in pediatric and neonatal critical care: a review. J Intensive Care Med 2004; 19(5):
                           243–58.

                                                                                                                                                                   Out-of-Operating Room
                                                                                                                                                                         Procedures

