# 15_EMERGENCY
# Source: 15 EMERGENCY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 15.0 Emergency Procedures
# Pages: ?-?
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- (none auto-detected; add by hand after review)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

           15.0 EMERGENCY
                                       PROCEDURES
                                       FOR THE
                                       ANESTHESIOLOGIST

                                       anesthesiologists
                                       Carlos Brun, MD
                                       Frederick G. Mihm, MD

===== PAGE ? =====
EMERGENCY CRICOTHYROTOMY
                                       Clinical situation: Typically, this procedure is performed in a hypoxic patient with an obstructed airway who can-
                                       not be ventilated with a mask or LMA, and cannot be intubated.
                                       Emergency “Stab” Cricothyrotomy5

                                       Equipment                  • Scalpel, preferably with #11 blade
                                                                  • ETT #6
                                                                  • Syringe for inflating cuff
                                                                  • Prep solution such as alcohol, chlorhexidine, or povidone-iodine

                                       Procedure                  1. Prep skin if time permits.
                                                                  2. Identify cricothyroid membrane between cricoid and thyroid cartilages (Fig. 15-1).
                                                                  3. Make 2–3 cm transverse or vertical incision through skin.
                                                                  4. Make 2.5-cm incision through cricothyroid membrane with single stab (Fig. 15-2).
                                                                  5. Reverse scalpel, place handle into wound, and turn 90° to expand incision.
                                                                  6. Pass tracheostomy tube (or standard ETT) into trachea.
                                                                  7. Inflate cuff on tracheosomy/ETT.
                                                                  8. Ventilate patient with capnography if possible.
                                                                  9. Secure tube.

                                       Emergency “Four-Step” Cricothyrotomy1,2

                                       Equipment                  • Scalpel with #11 blade
                                                                  • Tracheal hook (may be improvised by bending a 16-g needle into a hook with a
                                                                     hemostat)
                                                                  • ETT #6
                                                                  • Syringe for inflating cuff
                                                                  • Prep solution such as alcohol, chlorhexidine, or povidone-iodine
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                                                         Figure 15-1. Identify cricoid membrane.

                                1574

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergency Cricothyrotomy         1575

                                                                      Figure 15-2. If possible extend head
                                                                      and place bolster between scapula. Palpate
                                                                      thryoid and cricoid cartilages, then identify
                                                                      cricothryoidmembrane (CTM). Skin incision
                                                                      may be vertical if unsure of CTM location, as
                                                                      a finger inserted through a vertical incision
                                                                      may have more ability to palpate the CTM
                                                                      by blunt pressure in a vertical or horizontal
                                                                      search.

                    Procedure            1. Right hand dominant operator stands on patient’s left side. Position with head and
                                             neck extended.
                                         2. Prep skin if time permits.
                                         3. Nondominant hand identifies cricothyroid membrane while stabilizing thyroid carti-
                                             lage. Dominant hand makes 2.5-cm transverse incision through skin and cricothyroid
                                             membrane with single stab, keeping blade in place.
                                         4. Nondominant hand places tracheal hook into incision, lifting cricoid cartilage ven-
                                            trally, then scalpel is removed.
                                         5. Dominant hand inserts ETT, then removes tracheal hook.
                                         6. Inflate cuff.
                                         7. Ventilate patient with capnography if possible.
                                         8. Secure tube.

                   Emergency “Bougie-Guided” Cricothyrotomy3

                    Equipment            • Scalpel and hemostat (central line kit)
                                         • ETT #6
                                         • Syringe for inflating cuff
                                         • Bougie (pediatric 10 Fr for ETT 4.0–5.5 or adult 15 Fr for ETT 6.0)
                                         • Prep solution such as alcohol, chlorhexidine, or povidone-iodine

                    Procedure             1.	Operator may stand at head or either side of patient. Position with head and neck
                                              extended.
                                          2. Prep skin if time permits.
                                          3.	Nondominant hand identifies cricothyroid membrane while stabilizing thyroid
                                              cartilage.
                                          4. Dominant hand makes a 3-cm incision through skin.
                                          5.	Nondominant hand index finger placed into incision, palpates cricothyroid mem-
                                              brane with a side-to-side motion, then finger is removed from incision.
                                          6. Dominant hand makes a 2.5 cm horizontal incision in the cricothyroid membrane.
                                                                                                                                             for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                             Emergency Procedures

                                          7.	Dominant hand inserts coude tip end of bougie via incision seeking tracheal clicks
                                              and hang-up sign.
                                          8.	Pass ETT over bougie into trachea. If difficult, use hemostat to dilate cricothyroid
                                              membrane with bougie in place, and then pass ETT (Fig. 15-3).
                                          9. Remove bougie.
                                         10. Inflate cuff.
                                         11. Ventilate patient and monitor capnogram if possible.
                                         12. Secure tube.

===== PAGE ? =====
1576   SECTION 15.0       Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                              Figure 15-3. Adult bougie 15 Fr passed via incision with coude tip directed caudally
                                              attempting to feel for tracheal clicks and/or carinal hang-up sign. Average depth from
                                              skin to carina is 12–15 cm. A 6.0 or greater ETT will pass over an Adult 15 Fr bougie.

                                       Emergency “Guidewire” Cricothyrotomy

                                       Equipment              • Melker Emergency Cricothyrotomy Set (Cook Critical Care), or equivalent
                                                              • Scalpel
                                                              • 6-mL syringe (half-filled with crystalloid or local anesthetic if time allows)
                                                              • 18-ga introducer needle or iv catheter/needle
                                                              • Amplatz extra-stiff guidewire 0.038”
                                                              • Curved dilator
     for the Anesthesiologist

                                                              • Airway catheter
     Emergency Procedures

                                                              • Umbilical or twill tape

                                       Procedure              1. Attach syringe to iv catheter and needle, and assemble emergency airway device
                                                                  (Fig. 15-4) by inserting the dilator through the airway catheter until the handle stops
                                                                  against the connector of the airway catheter.
                                                              2. Identify cricothyroid membrane between cricoid and thyroid cartilages (Fig. 15-1).
                                                              3. Nondominant hand stabilizes cricothyroid membrane.
                                                              4. Dominant hand makes a vertical midline incision (Fig. 15-5).

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergency Cricothyrotomy   1577

                               Figure 15-4. Melker cricothryoidotomy kit with dilator passed firmly into airway
                               catheter prior to accessing the CTM.

                                                                                            IV catheter/needle
                                                          Blade making                         advancing at
                                                          vertical midline                      45° angle
                                                          incision

                                                    Dilator/airway
                                                    catheter advanced
                                                    into trachea
                                                                                                                                  for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                  Emergency Procedures

                                            Figure 15-5. Emergency guidewire cricothyroidotomy.

===== PAGE ? =====
1578   SECTION 15.0             Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                       Procedure                     5.	Dominant hand advances syringe with catheter/needle at a 45° caudad angle through
                                         (cont’d)                        incision until air bubbles can be aspirated (tracheal lumen) (Fig. 15-5).
                                                                     6. Remove syringe and needle, leaving catheter in place.
                                                                     7. Advance soft end of guidewire into catheter several cm past end of catheter.
                                                                     8. Remove catheter.
                                                                     9.	Advance the dilator/airway catheter assembly over the guidewire into the trachea,
                                                                         keeping proximal end of guidewire visible at all times. If difficult to pass dilator/airway,
                                                                         withdraw from incision, use hemostat to dilate cricothyroid membrane with guide-
                                                                         wire in place, and reattempt to advance assembly. (Consider replacing angiocatheter
                                                                         over guidewire, removing guidewire, and verifying position with capnography.)
                                                                         Remove guidewire and dilator, leaving airway catheter in place.
                                                                    10. Ventilate patient and monitor capnogram if possible.
                                                                    11. Secure airway with umbilical or twill tape around neck.

                                       EMERGENCY PERICARDIOCENTESIS
                                       Clinical situation: The patient typically has severe ↓ BP unexplained by any other causes (e.g., anesthetic drugs,
                                       autoPEEP, tension pneumothorax) and consistent with acute cardiac tamponade (dyspnea, tachypnea, ↓ BP, ↑ HR,
                                       electrical alternans, ↓ voltage EKG, ↓ pulse pressure or pulsus paradoxus, ↑ CVP/JVD, distant heart sounds) ± equal-
                                       ization of pressures (RAP∼RVEDP∼PAD∼PAOP) ± confirmation by TEE/TTE. Because of the high intrapericardial
                                       pressures, all “filling pressures” of both right and left heart appear high when preload is actually very low. In severe
                                       cases, patients will experience cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA).

                                       Equipment                    • 10-mL syringe
                                                                    • 18-ga spinal needle

                                       Procedure                    1. Identify xiphoid process and point 1” below and 1” left of midline (Fig. 15-6).
                                                                    2. Prep skin below xiphoid.
                                                                    3. A
                                                                        n 18 g spinal needle is directed towards the left shoulder and inserted at a ≤ 45°
                                                                        angle to the skin.
                                                                    4. Attach needle to syringe, and direct needle at ≤ 45° to the skin under rib toward left
                                                                        shoulder (Fig. 15-6).
                                                                    5. If pericardial fluid is withdrawn, BP will ↑ immediately.

                                       EMERGENCY ULTRASOUND-GUIDED
                                       PERICARDIOCENTESIS4,5
                                       In the above-described setting of respiratory and hemodynamic stability, ultrasonography may be used to aid in diag-
                                       nosis and treatment of cardiac tamponade. If you are unfamiliar with basic cardiac ultrasonography, a stat consult
                                       with a skilled ultrasonographer is necessary for performance of an ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis. Precepted
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                       hands-on training must be sought prior to using ultrasound for diagnosis or treatment of cardiac tamponade.
                                       Cardiac tamponade is a clinical diagnosis. Ultrasound findings include pericardial fluid with a “swinging heart”
                                       (ultrasound visualization of electrical alternans); increasing pericardial pressure causes right atrial systolic collapse,
                                       right ventricle diastolic collapse, septal shift toward left ventricle in systole; respiratory variation across tricuspid
                                       and mitral valves; in addition, IVC plethora with no respiratory variation may be seen. Patients with normal, stable
                                       hemodynamics and pericardial effusion do not require emergent pericardiocentesis.

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergency Ultrasound-Guided Pericardiocentesis        1579

                               Figure 15-6. Emergency blind pericardiocentesis. Once diagnosis of cardiac tamponade
                               is made, elevate head of bed to 30–45° to allow gravity to assist in fluid access. If
                               hemodynamics do not allow this, place the patient into a supine position. The access site
                               is 2.5 cm below the xiphoid process and 2.5 cm to the patient’s left. An 18 g spinal needle
                               is directed towards the left shoulder and inserted at a ≤ 45° angle to the skin. The stylet is
                               removed, a syringe with stopcock attached, and the apparatus advanced with aspiration.
                               If time allows, anesthetize the route with lidocaine 1–2% 5–10 mL.

                    Equipment                   Minimum
                                                • Skilled ultrasonographer
                                                • Ultrasound machine with phase array, curvilinear, or vascular access probe
                                                • Ultrasound gel or lubricant
                                                • Syringe
                                                • 18-g 5-inch spinal needle or 18-g Tuohy needle or longest 18-g angiocatheter/needle
                                                   available
                                                Preferred
                                                • Alcohol, chlorhexidine, or povidone iodine skin prep
                                                • Sterile gloves
                                                • Skilled ultrasonographer
                                                                                                                                                 for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                                 Emergency Procedures

                                                • Ultrasound machine with phase array, curvilinear, or vascular access probe
                                                • Sterile ultrasound probe sheath with gel
                                                • 10-, 20-, or 60-mL syringe
                                                • 18-g spinal needle
                                                • 3-way stopcock
                                                • Lidocaine 1–2% 5–10 mL with 5-mL syringe and 3-inch 25-g needle

===== PAGE ? =====
1580   SECTION 15.0       Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                       Procedure              1. Subxiphoid
                                                              2. Identify xiphoid process and point 1” below and 1” left of midline (Fig. 15-6).
                                                              3. Prep skin, then attach needle to 3-way stopcock on a syringe.
                                                              4. Use ultrasound probe with sterile sheath to find largest accessible collection of peri-
                                                                  cardial fluid in the subxiphoid space. A subxiphoid four-chamber view or short-axis
                                                                  midpapillary view should be attempted. Note that you may need to pass the needle
                                                                  through the liver to get to the pericardial space. If no chest compressions are being
                                                                  performed, consider positioning the patient in slight head-up or left lateral decubitus
                                                                  position to optimize fluid accessibility. If the patient is conscious, consider local anes-
                                                                 thetic injection along anticipated needle path under ultrasound visualization.
                                                              5. Place needle next to probe in same alignment to the skin and pericardial fluid
                                                                  (Fig. 15-7).
                                                              6. Advance needle tip under direct ultrasound visualization (Fig. 15-7).
                                                              7. When needle tip enters fluid collection, withdraw fluid. If flowing freely, continue to
                                                                  withdraw fluid until syringe is full, or you may turn the 3-way stopcock open to atmo-
                                                                  sphere to allow pericardial pressure to decompress. (If unsure of needle tip position,
                                                                  abort attempt or consider injection of 1–3 mL agitated saline via needle to identify
                                                                  location of tip relative to pericardial fluid.)
                                                              8. Remove needle once hemodynamics have improved with fluid removal.
                                                              9. Monitor patient for reaccumulation of pericardial fluid and consult for formal evalu-
                                                                  ation and possible pericardial drain placement.

                                             Figure 15-7. Emergency ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis. Subxiphoid approach.
                                             Once ultrasonographic diagnosis of cardiac tamponade is made, elevate head of bed to
                                             30–45° to allow gravity to assist in fluid access. If hemodynamics do not allow this,
                                             place the patient into a supine position. The subxiphoid access site is 2.5 cm below the
                                             xiphoid process and 2.5 cm to the patient’s left. With the ultrasound probe in place,
                                             visualizing the effusion and the heart, an 18 g spinal needle is directed towards the
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                             left shoulder and inserted at a ≤ 45° angle to the skin. The stylet is removed, a syringe
                                             with stopcock attached, and the apparatus advanced with aspiration under direct
                                             visualization. If unsure of needle tip location, stop advancement and wait for expert
                                             help or consider injection of 1–3 mL of agitated saline to visualize tip location. If time
                                             allows, anesthetize the route with lidocaine 1–2% 5–10 mL. Both in plane and out of
                                             plane techniques are acceptable.

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergency Ultrasound-Guided Pericardiocentesis             1581

                               Figure 15-8. Emergency ultrasound guided pericardiocentesis. Parasternal approach.
                               Place the patient supine or in Trendelenburg to maximize fluid collection size in
                               intended needle path. Identify the heart and fluid collection in the 4th or 5th intercostal
                               space between the sternum and the midclavicular line. Be sure that the lung is not
                               entering into ultrasonographic view. An 18 g spinal needle is directed towards the
                               patient’s back and inserted at a 90° angle to the skin. The stylet is removed, a syringe
                               with stopcock attached, and the apparatus advanced with aspiration under direct
                               visualization. If unsure of needle tip location, stop advancement and wait for expert
                               help or consider injection of 1–3 mL of agitated saline to visualize tip location. If time
                               allows, anesthetize the route with lidocaine 1–2% 5–10 mL.

                    Parasternal                 Prep skin, then attach needle to 3-way stopcock onto syringe.
                      (Fig. 15-8)               Use ultrasound probe with sterile sheath to find largest accessible collection of pericar-
                                                dial fluid in the parasternal area; 4th or 5th rib interspace along left sternal border. Note
                                                that you should not pass the needle through the pleural space/lung/vessels to enter the
                                                pericardial space. If patient is conscious, consider local anesthetic injection along antici-
                                                pated needle path under ultrasound visualization.
                                                Place needle next to probe in same alignment to the skin and pericardial fluid. You may
                                                use color-flow Doppler to visualize vessels in intended needle path.
                                                Advance needle tip under direct ultrasound visualization.
                                                When needle tip enters fluid collection, withdraw fluid. If flowing freely, continue to
                                                withdraw fluid until syringe is full, or you may turn the 3-way stopcock open to atmo-
                                                sphere to allow pericardial pressure/fluid to decompress. (If unsure of needle tip posi-
                                                                                                                                                        for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                                        Emergency Procedures

                                                tion, abort attempt or consider injection of 1–3 mL agitated saline via needle to identify
                                                location of tip relative to pericardial fluid.)
                                                Remove needle once hemodynamics have improved with fluid removal.
                                                Monitor patient for reaccumulation of pericardial fluid and consult for formal evalua-
                                                tion and possible pericardial drain placement.

===== PAGE ? =====
1582   SECTION 15.0              Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                       Suggested Reading
                                         1. Fitch, MT et al: Videos in clinical medicine. Emergency pericardiocentesis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366(12):e17.

                                       Suggested Viewing
                                       Links are available online to the following videos:
                                       Chest Tube Insertion: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQlt57AyQmg
                                       Emergency surgical airway: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwWIvJNecSg
                                       Cricothyrotomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_VFJGkJy1G8
                                       Ultrasound Guided Pericardiocentesis Procedure - SonoSite Ultrasound:
                                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6Z9DvPPmXg
                                       Needle Thoracostomy - www.proceduresconsult.com: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4cuotNQPRNc
                                       (subscription required to view complete video)
                                       Needle Decompression (thoracostomy):
                                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZpq8EPJ13Q&list=PLAB3A880AAEFB4992&index=2
                                       Needle decompression hazards: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fQqPktj_gFc
                                       Venous Cutdown.mp4: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHuJZHvTNGE

                                       EMERGENT NEEDLE/CATHETER THORACOSTOMY
                                       Clinical situation: A patient is experiencing severe hypotension and hypoxemia unexplained by any other cause
                                       (e.g., autoPEEP, cardiac tamponade) and consistent with acute tension pneumothorax (dyspnea, tachypnea, tachy-
                                       cardia, syncope, ↑ Paw, ↓ movement of involved chest, ↓ breath sounds, ↑ resonance to percussion, and ↑ rib inter-
                                       space distance compared to uninvolved side) and cardiovascular Sx related to ↑ thoracic pressures and ↓ preload
                                       (↓ BP, ↑ HR, ↑ pulse pressure, ↑ CVP). The CVP is artificially elevated, reflecting the high intrathoracic pressures.
                                       Actual (transmural) CVP is very low. In severe cases, patients may experience cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical
                                       activity (PEA) because high intrathoracic pressures effectively stop venous return to the heart.
                                       Note: AutoPEEP MUST be ruled out first, particularly when the diagnosis is bilateral tension PTX. Auto PEEP is
                                       effectively ruled out (except with a ball valve airway lesion) by disconnecting the ETT from ventilator/Ambu bag
                                       and allowing patient to exhale. If the patient’s condition immediately improves, you have made the diagnosis of
                                       autoPEEP.
                                       Note: With a pneumothorax, release of the pressure that has built up in the chest is a lifesaving maneuver. A large-
                                       bore chest tube does not need to be placed emergently. The much simpler needle/catheter thoracostomy is effective
                                       and less demanding for the nonsurgeon.

                                       Equipment                     One of the following:
                                                                     • 16-g needle or iv catheter/needle (preferred) with a length of 5 cm
                                                                     • 16-g single-lumen CVP kit
                                                                     • Alcohol, chlorhexidine, or povidone-iodine skin prep

                                       Procedure                     1. Identify the space. Identify the 2nd intercostals space by palpitating the angle of Louis
                                                                        (union of manubrium and sternum); then move laterally to find the insertion of the
                                                                        2nd rib. The interspace directly below this rib is the 2nd intercostal space (Fig. 15-9).
                                                                        Access should occur in the midclavicular line in this space. Alternatively, the anterior
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                                                        or mid-axillary line in the 4th–5th intercostal space may be used. Identify the anterior
                                                                        axillary line by drawing an imaginary line caudally from the anterior axillary fold to
                                                                        rib space at or above the nipple line.

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergent Ultrasound-guided Needle/Catheter Thoracostomy               1583

                               Figure 15-9. Midclavicular 2nd intercostal space. Lateral needle decompression in
                               the 4th or 5th midaxillary line. To avoid injury to neurovascular bundle, insert needle
                               along upper border of the inferior rib at the selected space.

                    Procedure                  2. Prep skin.
                      (cont’d)                 3.	Enter the selected intercostals space anteriorly over the upper border of the inferior
                                                   rib to avoid neurovascular bundle running along the underside of the superior rib.
                                               4.	With entry into the pleural space, there may be an audible rush of air and with im-
                                                   mediate hemodynamic improvement.
                                               5. Remove needle.
                                               6. The angiocatheter may be held in place until a chest tube is inserted.
                                               7.	Note: A more permanent chest tube will still need to be placed (i.e., the patient no
                                                   longer has a tension pneumothorax, but still has a pneumothorax.) This can be done
                                                   in a more controlled situation by someone skilled in that procedure.

                   Emergent Ultrasound-guided Needle/Catheter
                   Thoracostomy
                   Tension pneumothorax diagnosis and management have been described earlier. If progressive pneumothorax with
                   worsening cardiopulmonary function is suspected, a skilled ultrasonographer is needed to rule out pneumothorax
                   prior to tension pneumothorax development. Lung ultrasound has > 90% sensitivity and > 90% specificity for pneu-
                   mothorax.6 A vascular access, curvilinear, or phase array probe with a depth field of 6 cm using 2D imaging may be
                   utilized to detect pneumothorax. 2D and M mode may be used to identify signs to rule in or out a pneumothorax.
                   Precepted hands-on training must be sought prior to using ultrasound to diagnose or treat pneumothorax.

                    Equipment                  • Skilled ultrasonographer
                                               • Ultrasound machine with phase array, curvilinear, or vascular access probe
                                                                                                                                                    for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                                    Emergency Procedures

                                               • Ultrasound gel or lubricant
                                               • 16-g needle or angiocatheter/needle

===== PAGE ? =====
1584   SECTION 15.0       Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                       Procedure              1. Identify pneumothorax with ultrasound.7
                                                              2. Scan least dependent area of chest with ultrasound probe (in supine patients—
                                                                 3rd–5th rib interspace midclavicular line) at 6 cm in 2D with indicator toward the
                                                                  patient’s head and held perpendicular to chest wall (Fig. 15-10).
                                                              3. Identify the pleural line and seek lung sliding. Lung sliding confirms that the
                                                                 lung is touching the chest wall. Presence of lung sliding rules out large tension
                                                                  pneumothorax.
                                                              4. Seek B lines in 2D. Presence of B line rules out large tension pneumothorax in the
                                                                  scanned space.
                                                              5. Check for Seashore sign in M mode at site of lung sliding (Fig. 15-11). Presence of
                                                                  Seashore sign rules out large tension pneumothorax in the scanned space.
                                                              6. Alternatively, absence of Seashore sign and presence of bar code (Fig. 15-12) sign
                                                                  indicate pneumothorax. The lung point sign is a moving dark point seen at the
                                                                  interface of normal lung sliding to the air of the pneumothorax. If lung point sign is
                                                                   present, this indicates pneumothorax.
                                                              7. If all the above signs are absent and A lines are present, this does not rule out or in
                                                                   pneumothorax. Other modalities such as CXR or CT for diagnosis or continuing
                                                                   with diagnostic/therapeutic needle thoracostomy will be required.
                                                              8. Prep skin. Place angiocath/needle to side of probe.
                                                              9. Enter the selected intercostal space anteriorly over the upper border of the inferior
                                                                   rib to avoid neurovascular bundle; attempt to visualize needle tip.
                                                             10. With entry into the pleural space, there may be an audible rush of air, and there
                                                                   should be immediate hemodynamic improvement.
                                                             11. Remove needle once hemodynamics or ventilation improves to avoid lung lacera-
                                                                   tion. The angio catheter may be held in place until a chest tube is inserted.
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                             Figure 15-10. Place probe with indicator toward patient’s head, perpendicular to
                                             chest wall, at the 3rd–5th intercostal space midclavicular line. In a supine patient, gas
                                             typically rises to this least dependent area of the chest cavity. You may move the probe
                                             caudally to scan multiple rib spaces in the midclavicular and axillary lines.8

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergent Ultrasound-guided Needle/Catheter Thoracostomy   1585

                               Figure 15-11. Seashore sign. M mode between the rib interspace with normal lung
                               motion. The less mobile subcutaneous tissues and pleural tissues are seen as horizontal
                               lines implying “waves” landing on a “sandy beach,” the moving lung tissue represented
                               by granular pattern below the pleural line.

                                                                                                                                       for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                       Emergency Procedures

                               Figure 15-12. Bar code sign. During respiratory cycle, the “sand” (normal granular
                               pattern) under the pleural line is replaced by “bar code” horizontal lines, indicating no
                               lung sliding.9

===== PAGE ? =====
1586   SECTION 15.0            Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                       EMERGENCY INTRAOSSEOUS ACCESS
                                       Emergency intraosseous (IO) access is indicated when immediate vascular access is needed, and peripheral/central
                                       access is not possible, and endotracheal medication administration will not suffice. We discuss the use of the EZ-IO
                                       system of IO access. Contraindications include burn, infection, or fracture of bone selected for access, joint replace-
                                       ment at selected site, or inability to identify landmarks.

                                       Procedure                  1. Prior to attaching the EZ-Connect: Ensure clamp is open. Prime set and purge air.
                                                                      Identify and clean insertion site (Fig. 15-13).
                                                                  2. Snap EZ-IO needle set with plastic hub onto EZ-IO power driver (Fig. 15-14); (Red 15 ga,
                                                                      15 mm for < 40 kg. Blue 15 ga, 25 mm for > 40 kg. Yellow hub 15 ga, 45 mm, > 40 kg
                                                                      and excessive tissue or humerus site).
                                                                  3. Remove needle safety cap.
                                                                  4. Gently press Needle Set through skin until tip touches bone.
                                                                  5. At least 5 mm of the catheter must be visible (Fig. 15-15).
                                                                  6. Squeeze Driver trigger and apply gentle, steady pressure. Release trigger when sudden
                                                                      “give” or “pop” is felt, indicating entry into medullary space. If Driver stalls or will not
                                                                     penetrate the bone, you may be applying too much downward force. Humerus site: to
                                                                     improve stability, needle should be advanced 2 cm after contact with bone. In adults,
                                                                     advance needle until catheter hub is against the skin. Change sites for access rather
                                                                      than have repeated attempts at the same site.
                                                                  7. Remove Power Driver and stylet; confirm catheter stability with at least three of the
                                                                     following four methods:
                                                                      • Stability of catheter
                                                                      • Ability to aspirate
                                                                      • Physiologic or pharmacologic changes with medication administration
                                                                      • Adequate flow rate
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

                                                         Proximal Tibia                         Distal Tibia                     Proximal Humerus

                                                 Figure 15-13. Identify and clean insertion site (proximal or distal tibia or humeral
                                                 head).

===== PAGE ? =====
Emergency Intraosseous Access   1587

                                                                                                     EZ-I0 45 mm
                                                                                                 (> 40 kg, excessive
                                                                                                  tissue, humerus)

                                                                                   EZ-I0 25 mm
                                                                                    (> 40 kg)
                                                                  EZ-I0 15 mm
                                                                   (3 –39 kg)

                                           Figure 15-14. EZ-IO power driver and needle set sizes.

                                                                                   5 mm
                                                                                                                                   for the Anesthesiologist
                                                                                                                                   Emergency Procedures

                               Figure 15-15. At least 5 mm of the catheter must be visible after pressing needle
                               through skin to contact bone and prior to squeezing trigger.

===== PAGE ? =====
1588   SECTION 15.0             Emergency Procedures for the Anesthesiologist

                                                Figure 15-16. To remove EZ-IO catheter, attach Luer-lock syringe. Rotate syringe
                                                and catheter clockwise while using traction to withdraw catheter

                                       Procedure                   8. Secure with EZ-Stabilizer or have an assistant manually stabilize hub until secured,
                                         (cont’d)                      roll 2 sets of 4 × 4s into tight cylinders, apply cylinders in a parallel orientation around
                                                                      catheter, “sandwiching” the hub, then secure with tape or transparent adhesive film
                                                                      with hole cut out for hub access.
                                                                   9. Attach EZ-Connect extension set. DO NOT ATTACH A SYRINGE DIRECTLY TO
                                                                       THE EZ-IO CATHETER HUB EXCEPT WHEN DRAWING BLOOD FOR LABORA-
                                                                       TORY ANALYSIS (STABILIZE NEEDLE SET).
                                                                 10. Flush the EZ-IO catheter with normal saline (10 mL for adults; use appropriate weight-
                                                                     based dose for smaller patients). For patients responsive to pain, consider lidocaine up
                                                                     to 0.2–1 mg/kg io slowly prior to saline flush.

                                       EZ-IO Removal             Attach Luer-lock syringe. Rotate syringe and catheter clockwise while using traction to
                                                                 withdraw catheter—DO NOT ROCK OR BEND THE CATHETER DURING REMOVAL
                                                                 (Fig. 15-16).

                                       References
                                        1. Brofeldt BT, Panacek EA, Richards JR: An easy cricothyrotomy approach: the rapid four-step technique. Acad Emerg Med 1996;
                                           3(11):1060–3.
                                        2. Hamaikers AE, Henderson JJ: Equipment and strategies for emergency tracheal access in the adult patent. Anaesthesia 2011;
                                           66(Suppl 2):65–80.
                                        3. MacIntyre A, et al: Three-step emergency cricothyroidotomy. Mil Med 2007; 172(12):1228–30.
                                        4. Fitch MT, et al: Videos in clinical medicine. Emergency pericardiocentesis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366(12):e17.
                                        5. Pepi M, Muratori M: Echocardiography in the diagnosis and management of pericardial disease. J Cardiovasc Med 2006; 7(7):
                                           533–44.
                                        6. Alrajhi K, Woo MY, Vaillancourt C: Test characteristics of ultrasonography for the detection of pneumothorax: a systematic
                                           review and meta-analysis. Chest 2012; 141(3):703–8.
                                        7. Lichtenstein D: Whole Body Ultrasonography in the Critically Ill. Springer, New York: 2010.
                                        8. Ueda K, Ahmen W, Ross AF: Intraoperative pneumothorax identified with transthoracic ultrasound. Anesthesiology 2011;
                                           115(3):653–5.
                                        9. Ioos V, et al: An integrated approach for prescribing fewer chest x-rays in the ICU. Ann Intensive Care 2011; 1(1):4.
     for the Anesthesiologist
     Emergency Procedures

