# 2_OPHTHALMIC_SURGERY
# Source: 2 OPHTHALMIC SURGERY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 2.0 Ophthalmic Surgery
# Pages: 144-177
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Cataract Extraction With Intraocular Lens Insertion (p. 144)
- Corneal Transplant (p. 146)
- Trabeculectomy (p. 148)
- Ectropion Repair (p. 151)
- Entropion Repair (p. 152)
- Ptosis Repair (p. 153)
- Eyelid Reconstruction (p. 155)
- Pterygium Excision (p. 157)
- Repair Of Ruptured Or Lacerated Globe (p. 162)
- Dacryocystorhinostomy (Dcr) (p. 165)
- Enucleation (p. 168)
- Orbitotomy—Anterior And Lateral (p. 170)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                     2.0 Ophthalmic
                                      Surgery

                                      surgeons
                                      Natalia F. Callaway, MD
                                      Darius M. Moshfeghi, MD

                                      anesthesiologist
                                      Richard A. Jaffe, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 144 =====
Cataract Extraction with Intraocular Lens
                             Insertion
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                             Description: Cataract—the leading cause of treatable blindness in the world—is defined as opacification of the
                             crystalline lens. Cataract surgery is the most common surgical procedure, with more than 3 million performed
                              in the United States each year. Several approaches to cataract removal have evolved as a result of advances in both
                              instrumentation and artificial intraocular lenses (IOL). Most modern cataract surgery is performed using a varia-
                              tion of the extracapsular technique, which involves removal of the crystalline lens through an opening made in
                              the anterior lens capsule (known as a capsulectomy). Removal of the lens nucleus can then be accomplished intact,
                              which requires an 8- to 10-mm corneal incision, or more commonly by phacoemulsification wherein ultrasound
                              energy is used to fragment the lens, allowing aspiration of the lens material. The advantages of phacoemulsification
                              are that the entire procedure can be performed through a much smaller, clear corneal incision (usually ,3 mm in
                              length) and is associated with fewer adverse events. With both approaches, the softer, more peripheral cortical lens
                              material is then removed by aspiration, leaving the posterior capsular bag intact to support an IOL implant (Fig. 2-1).
                              If the lens capsule is torn or is for any reason unable to support an IOL, the lens can be fixated with sutures in the
                              posterior chamber (behind the iris), or an anterior chamber IOL can be placed in front of the iris. Presently, the most
                              popular materials for IOL implants are polymethylmethacrylate, silicon, and acrylic. Only silicon and acrylic are fold-
                              able, which allows their insertion through a small corneal incision and, therefore, are the most commonly used. The
                              wound is closed with nylon or Vicryl suture (9-0 or 10-0) to achieve a watertight seal, although when small incisions
                              are used, the wounds are often self-sealing and do not require sutures.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: Intracapsular cataract extraction involves removal of the crystalline lens
                             with its surrounding capsular bag intact. To accomplish this, the zonules that normally stabilize and center the lens
                             must be broken, and a cryoprobe often is used to remove the lens from the eye through a large incision. This proce-
                             dure is performed infrequently, given the superior visual outcomes of extracapsular techniques. It may be indicated in
                             situations where capsular bag support has been compromised by either trauma, malignancy, or inherited disorders.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Cataract

                                       Figure 2-1. A: Placement of intraocular lens into remaining capsular bag. B: “In-the-
                                       bag” insertion.

                  144

===== PAGE 145 =====
Cataract Extraction with Intraocular Lens Insertion    145

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision               2.8-mm peripheral cornea (phacoemulsification) or 8–10 mm (corneoscleral junction)

                     Special                Surgical microscope; phacoemulsification machine
                       instrumentation

                                                                                                                                                    Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                     Antibiotics            Subconjunctival cefazolin (50–100 mg) or gentamicin (20–40 mg) or a topical fluoroquinolone

                     Surgical time          15–60 min

                     EBL                    None

                     Postop care            Possible eye patch/shield for 24 h, topical medications

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Posterior capsule opacification: ~25% (may require Nd:YAG laser treatment)
                                            Posterior capsule rupture: 3.1%
                                            Corneal edema: , 2%
                                            Macular edema: 1–2%
                                            Retinal detachment: , 1%
                                            Choroidal hemorrhage: 0.3%
                                            Endophthalmitis: , 0.2 %

                     Pain score             1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              3 mo–80+ yr (depends on type of cataract)

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              . 1,000,000/yr in the United States. Prevalence: 50% @ 65–74 yo; 70% @ 75+ yo

                     Etiology               90% age related; congenital (1/250 newborns); metabolic; traumatic; medication-induced
                                            (steroids)

                     Associated             Systemic diseases of elderly patients–common; cardiovascular disease; diabetes; HTN.
                       conditions           Genetic: Marfan’s disease; metabolic disorders
                                            Patients may be on antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy. It is generally accepted that these
                                            drugs do not need to be discontinued before cataract surgery (especially if INR ≤ 1.5)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   At the present time in the United States, cataract surgery is most commonly performed using only topical anesthetic
                   agents (e.g., preservative-free 2–4% lidocaine, levobupivacaine 0.75%, ropivacaine 1%, or oxybuprocaine 1%) to block
                   trigeminal nerve endings in the cornea and conjunctiva. Iris and ciliary body anesthesia depend on local anesthetic
                   penetration into the anterior chamber. Thus, in a few patients, there may be a need for supplemental anesthetic ad-
                   ministration (e.g., intracameral, 1% lidocaine) and less commonly systemic analgesic and sedative drugs. Inadvertent
                   eye and lid movement should be expected. Adverse reactions to topical anesthetics are extremely rare and typically
                   allergic in nature. High concentrations or prolonged exposure to local anesthetics can be toxic to the corneal epi-
                   thelium (delayed wound healing; corneal erosion), and to the retina. A prospective randomized double-blind series
                   demonstrated that combining topical anesthesia with intracameral lidocaine anesthesia was safe and effective in
                   phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation. This technique avoided potential sequelae of retrobulbar
                   or peribulbar anesthesia for cataract surgery. However, in one study of patients undergoing cataract surgery using
                   topical anesthesia reported greater intraoperative and postoperative discomfort than those given a sub-Tenon block.
                   Use of intravenous sedation increased the incidence of adverse events as compared with topical anesthesia without

===== PAGE 146 =====
146        s e c t i o n 2.0     Ophthalmic Surgery

                             sedation. All local anesthetic techniques should be avoided in patients with uncontrolled movement disorders, or an
                             inability to cooperate.
                             Anesthesia-trained personnel monitored most patients during cataract surgery, and the most commonly used local
                             anesthetic was lidocaine. The anesthetic method associated with the lowest degree of pain, dissatisfaction, drowsi-
                             ness, or nausea and vomiting was a regional block technique with administration of sedatives and diphenhydramine.
                             See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC (adult), p. 158, or for Pediatric Oph-
     Ophthalmic

                             thalmic Surgery, p. 1199.
      Surgery

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Ashwin PT, Shah S, Wolffsohn JS: Advances in cataract surgery. Clin Exp Optom 2009; 92(4):333–42.
                                2. Borazan M, Karalezli A, Akova YA, Algan C, Oto S: Comparative clinical trial of topical anaesthetic agents for cataract surgery
                                   with phacoemulsification: lidocaine 2% drops, levobupivacaine 0.75% drops, and ropivacaine 1% drops. Eye 2008; 22(3):425–9.
                                3. Chuang LH, Yeung L, Ku WC, et al: Safety and efficacy of topical anesthesia combined with a lower concentration of
                                   intracameral lidocaine in phacoemulsification: paired human eye study. J Cataract Refract Surg 2007; 33(2):293–6.
                                4. Coelho RP, Weissheimer J, Romão E, et al: Pain induced by phacoemulsification without sedation using topical or peribulbar
                                   anesthesia. J Cataract Refract Surg 2005; 31(2):385–8.
                                5. Eichel R, Goldberg I: Anaesthesia techniques for cataract surgery: a survey of delegates to the Congress of the International
                                   Council of Ophthalmology, 2002. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2005; 33(5):469–72.
                                6. Eke T, Thompson JR: Serious complications of local anaesthesia for cataract surgery: a 1 year national survey in the United
                                   Kingdom. Br J Ophthalmol 2007; 91(4):470–5.
                                7. Malik A, Fletcher EC, Chong V, Dasan J: Local anesthesia for cataract surgery. J Cataract Refract Surg 2010; 36(1):133–52.
                                8. Rogers GM, Goins KM: Cataract surgery in the patient that cannot lie flat. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2010; 21(1):71–4.
                                9. Sanmugasunderam S, Khalfan A: Is fasting required before cataract surgery? A retrospective review. Can J Ophthalmol 2009;
                                   44(6):655–6.
                               10. Srinivasan S, Fern AI, Selvaraj S, et al: Randomized double blind clinical trial comparing topical and sub-Tenon’s anaesthesia
                                   in routine cataract surgery. Br J Anaesth 2004; 93:683–6.
                               11. Tan CS, Au Eong KG, Kumar CM: Visual experiences during cataract surgery: what anaesthesia providers should know. Eur
                                   J Anaesthesiol 2005; 22(6):413–9.
                               12. Vann MA, Ogunnaike BO, Joshi GP: Sedation and anesthesia care for ophthalmologic surgery during local/regional
                                   anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2007; 107(3):502–8.

                             Corneal Transplant
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Patients with corneal pathology who have failed stem-cell techniques may require corneal
                             transplantation (penetrating keratoplasty [PKP] or lamellar keratoplasty). Corneal transplantation
                             involves replacing a portion of the host cornea with tissue from a donor eye (allograft). The primary goals of
                             this procedure are to both restore the integrity of the cornea and establish a clear visual axis. The ideal death-
                             to-preservation time of the donor cornea is , 18 h, and the donor cornea can be stored for up to 2 wk before
                             transplantation. The procedure often begins with the placement of a scleral fixation ring (Flieringa ring) just
                             beyond the corneoscleral junction, which is secured with 7-0 Vicryl sutures. This provides additional scleral sup-
                             port that is especially helpful in children or patients who have undergone previous cataract surgery. The donor
                             corneal button is removed from the surrounding corneoscleral rim with a trephine and kept in storage medium
                             until the recipient bed is prepared. The host cornea is then trephined in a previously marked central location,
                             using either manual or vacuum-assist techniques while the anterior chamber is maintained with viscoelastics.
                             After the eye is opened, it is critical to avoid patient movement, coughing, bucking, or any Valsalva maneuvers
                             to prevent expulsion of the intraocular contents through the wound. The size of the donor button is generally
                             cut ,0.25 mm larger than the host bed. The donor cornea is then sutured endothelial side down into place with
                             10-0 nylon sutures, which can be accomplished using 16 interrupted sutures (generally preferred with corneas
                             that are inflamed, thinned, or vascularized), running sutures, or a combination, depending on a number of fac-
                             tors unique to each patient. Great care is taken during manipulation of the allograft to avoid trauma to the inner
                             surface of the graft, as damage to the endothelial cells in this location can result in primary graft failure.

===== PAGE 147 =====
Corneal Transplant   147

                   Variant procedure or approaches: PKP may be combined with cataract extraction or exchange of a previously
                   placed intraocular lens (IOL). In addition, PKP may be combined with limbal stem-cell transplantation (autograft
                   from less injured eye) in cases where the most superficial corneal epithelial layer is unable to regenerate follow-
                   ing damage (e.g., chemical burn injuries) to the limbal stem cells. Partial-thickness transplants, called lamellar
                   keratoplasty, also can be performed in certain clinical situations. PKP may be combined with glaucoma filtration
                   procedure and retinal surgery.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Persistent corneal edema; inherited corneal dystrophy; keratoconus; corneal scar; infec-

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                   tious keratitis; chemical injury

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision               Corneal

                     Special                Surgical microscope
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Open-globe precautions: Avoid coughing, bucking, or Valsalva maneuvers to prevent expulsion
                       considerations       of intraocular contents.

                     Antibiotics            Subconjunctival cefazolin (50–100 mg) or gentamicin (20–40 mg)

                     Surgical time          60–90 min

                     EBL                    Minimal

                     Postop care            Patch/shield for 24 h, long-term topical immunosuppression to prevent graft rejection

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Graft rejection: ,5%
                                            Suprachoroidal hemorrhage: , 1% (higher for MAC: ,4%)
                                            Infection: , 1%

                     Pain score             2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Any age

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              . 40,000 cases/yr in the United States and Canada

                     Etiology               Corneal opacity or decompensation resulting from endothelial failure; inherited dystrophy; kera-
                                            toconus; scarring related to trauma/chemical burn/infection

                     Associated             Congenital malformations; sleep apnea; atopic disease/asthma; Down syndrome
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Corneal transplants commonly require GA or a retrobulbar/peribulbar block to prevent movement of the eyelids or
                   extraocular muscles that could lead to distortion of the globe during the procedure. However, in patients with sig-
                   nificant coagulopathy, a history of perforated corneal ulcers, severe systemic disease, or other conditions that make
                   the use of these forms of anesthesia less preferable, corneal transplant can be performed with topical anesthesia in
                   cooperative patients.
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC (adult), p. 158, or for Pediatric Oph-
                   thalmic Surgery, p. 1199.

===== PAGE 148 =====
148        s e c t i o n 2.0       Ophthalmic Surgery

                             Suggested Readings
                                1.    Kallio H, Rosenberg PH: Advances in ophthalmic regional anaesthesia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2005; 19(2):215–27.
                                2.    Riddle HK Jr, Price MO, Price FW Jr: Topical anesthesia for penetrating keratoplasty. Cornea 2004; 23(7):712–4.
                                3.    Tan DT, Dart JK, Holland EJ, Kinoshita S: Corneal transplantation. Lancet 2012; 379(9827):1749–61.
                                4.    Yeung SN, Kim P, Lichtinger A, et al: Combined topical and intracameral anesthesia for Descemet’s stripping automated
                                      endothelial keratoplasty. Int Ophthalmol 2012; 32(3):273–6.
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                             Trabeculectomy
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Glaucoma is a chronic disorder characterized by progressive and irreversible optic neuropathy with
                             visual field defect. Glaucoma can develop at any intraocular pressure (IOP), but most current treatments are targeted
                             at decreasing IOP. It is the second most common cause of blindness in the United States and accounts for more than
                             5.1 million cases of blindness throughout the world. Trabeculectomy (glaucoma filtration procedure) is the most
                             common surgical procedure used to reduce IOP and is often undertaken only after maximal medical therapy has
                             failed. In trabeculectomy, a drainage fistula (ostium) is created from the anterior chamber to the subconjunctival
                             space, allowing aqueous humor to drain from the eye. (Normal anatomy relevant for aqueous fluid production is
                             shown in Fig. 2-2). First, a limbus-based or fornix-based incision is created in the conjunctiva and Tenon’s layer,
                             exposing the underlying bare sclera. A partial-thickness (4–5 mm) scleral flap, hinged at the limbus, is then created.
                             Because scarring (secondary to inflammation) is the most common cause of surgical failure, antimetabolites, such as
                             mitomycin-C or 5-fluorouracil, are often applied to the surgical site to slow or prevent fibroblast proliferation. Next,
                             an incision into the anterior chamber is created at the base of the scleral flap and converted to a sclerotomy by remov-
                             ing an approximate 1 3 4 mm piece of corneoscleral tissue. To prevent the iris from entering the ostium as well as to
                             protect against future angle closure, an iridectomy is performed, followed by closure of the overlying scleral flap with
                             10-0 nylon sutures. Before closure, it is important to avoid coughing, bucking, or Valsalva maneuvers, which might
                             cause suprachoroidal hemorrhage or expulsion of intraocular content. The conjunctiva is then reapposed, using run-
                             ning 8-0 or 9-0 absorbable or nylon sutures.

                                           Figure 2-2. Ocular anatomy concerned with control of IOP. (Reproduced with
                                           permission from Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al., eds: Clinical Anesthesiology,
                                           7th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013.)

===== PAGE 149 =====
Trabeculectomy     149

                                                                                                                                                           Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                                                                                                        Molteno Implant

                                Figure 2-3. Basic technique of inserting Molteno implant. Silicone tube is inserted into
                                anterior chamber via needle track and is connected to a subconjunctival acrylic plate that is
                                attached to the sclera near the equator. (Reproduced with permission from Allingham RR,
                                ed: Shield’s Textbook of Glaucoma, 6th edition. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2010.)

                   Variant procedure or approaches: In patients for whom trabeculectomy has failed, a variety of drainage implants
                   have been created to maintain the patency of the drainage ostium. These devices (e.g., Ahmed, Molteno, Krupin,
                   Baerveldt) consist of plastic reservoirs that are placed in the sub-Tenon’s space and are connected to a tube that enters
                   the anterior chamber (Fig. 2-3). These devices differ in implant size and whether or not there is an internal valve to
                   prevent excessive drainage. Long-term IOP reduction with drainage implants is not as successful as trabeculectomy.
                   In infants and children with congenital glaucoma (see Pediatric Ophthalmic Surgery, p. 1198), the anterior chamber
                   angle, which normally allows outflow of aqueous, develops abnormally and often requires surgical intervention.
                   Goniotomy (opening Schlemm’s canal) is usually the initial procedure of choice. An alternative procedure is a tra-
                    beculotomy performed by exposing Schlemm’s canal (the drainage system) in a corneoscleral cutdown. A trabeculo-
                    tome is then threaded into this canal and is rotated, creating a tear in the trabecular meshwork and allowing direct
                    communication between the anterior chamber and Schlemm’s canal.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Glaucoma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision                 Superior portion of eye

                     Special                  Surgical microscope
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   Prevent coughing, bucking, Valsalva maneuvers while globe is open, to prevent expulsion of
                       considerations         intraocular contents.

                     Antibiotics              Subconjunctival cefazolin (50–100 mg) or gentamicin (20–40 mg)

                     Surgical time            30–60 min

                     EBL                      Minimal

                     Postop care              Patch/shield × 24 h; long-term topical corticosteroids to reduce scarring. Topical antibiotics for
                                              the fistula. Scleral flap sutures can be cut with a laser postop to increase flow. Patient advised
                                              to wear patch at night × 1–2 wk.

===== PAGE 150 =====
150        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Mortality                Rare

                               Morbidity                Overfiltration causing hypotony
                                                        Leaking bleb
                                                        Fistula scarring
                                                        Infection
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                                        Anterior chamber bleeding/hyphema
                                                        Serous choroidal detachment/effusion
                                                        Persistent corneal edema
                                                        Suprachoroidal hemorrhage

                               Pain score               1–2

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                Any age; more common in the elderly

                               Male:Female              1:1

                               Incidence                1.7% Caucasians; 5.6% African Americans

                               Etiology                 Impaired aqueous outflow. Cause of primary open angle glaucoma unknown, but elevated IOP
                                                        is the strongest risk factor. Many secondary causes, including angle closure, trauma, inflamma-
                                                        tion, neovascularization, and congenital abnormalities.

                               Associated               Diseases of the elderly, including cardiovascular disease, HTN, and diabetes. Children may have
                                 conditions             multiple congenital anomalies.

                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             Trabeculectomy is typically accomplished using sub-Tenon anesthesia, which allows monitoring of conjunctival
                             mobility when selecting the surgical site. Alternatively, it can be done using topical anesthetics. GA is usually
                              reserved for pediatric patients, patients unlikely or unable to cooperate during the procedure, or if low intraocular
                              pressure from anesthesia is desirable.
                             Subconjunctival anesthesia at the bleb site may be associated with a poorer outcome, because it may stimulate fibro-
                             blasts to cause scarring due to hemorrhage and tissue damage. Peribulbar and retrobulbar injections in patients with
                             advanced glaucoma may be associated with increased intraocular pressure, which can be prevented by decreasing
                             anesthetic volumes and avoiding the use of orbital Honan balloons.
                             Topical and intracameral anesthesia are being increasingly employed for trabeculectomy to avoid injection pain and
                             potential complications, such as conjunctival button holes and hemorrhage. However, topical agents have the fol-
                             lowing limitations: inferior duration and intensity of anesthetic effect and lack of ocular akinesia, which is necessary
                             to prevent globe compression in patients with prominent eyelid squeezing. Intracameral lidocaine as a supplement
                             to topical anesthesia has the theoretical advantage of increasing depth of anterior chamber, but it poses the risk of
                             damaging the phakic lens and excessive iridectomy enlargement. To avoid these possible complications, intracameral
                             acetylcholine or topical pilocarpine can be used in conjunction with intracameral lidocaine.
                             See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC (adult), p. 158, or for Pediatric Oph-
                             thalmic Surgery, p. 1199.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Edmunds B, Bunce CV, Thompson JR, et al: Factors associated with success in first-time trabeculectomy for patients at low
                                   risk of failure with chronic open-angle glaucoma. Ophthalmology 2004; 111:97–103.
                                2. Kumar CM, Eid H, Dodds C: Sub-Tenon’s anaesthesia: complications and their prevention. Eye (Lond) 2011; 25(6):
                                   694–703.
                                3. Sauder G, Jonas JB: Topical anesthesia for penetrating trabeculectomy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2002; 240:739–42.
                                4. Zabriskie NA, Ahmed IIK, Crandall AS, et al: A comparison of topical and retrobulbar anesthesia for trabeculectomy.
                                   J Glaucoma 2002; 11:306–14.

===== PAGE 151 =====
Ectropion Repair      151

                   Ectropion Repair
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ectropion is a malposition of the eyelid often due to laxity in the tarsoligamentous sling, in which the
                   lid margin is everted away from the globe. The surgical approach depends on the underlying anatomic abnormality,

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                   which can be congenital, involutional, cicatricial (scarring), or due to mechanical traction from masses or facial nerve

                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                   palsy. A lateral tarsal strip procedure is often used, with the lateral canthal tendon first released by performing a
                   lateral canthotomy and cantholysis of the crus (Fig. 2-4). A lateral portion of tarsus is then dissected free of overly-
                   ing skin, muscle, and conjunctiva. This strip of tarsus is trimmed to the appropriate length and is secured to the peri-
                   osteum of the lateral orbital rim with suture. Excess skin is removed and the defect is closed. If punctal malposition
                   is present, the tarsal strip procedure may be combined with a medial conjunctival spindle procedure.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Cicatricial ectropion from a contracting scar can sometimes be released with
                   a Z-plasty incision that releases vertical skin tension. Alternatively, a full-thickness skin graft may be required and
                   can be harvested from the upper lid or the postauricular or supraclavicular regions.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ectropion of the eyelid

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision                Lateral canthal region or area of scarring

                     Special                 Surgical loupes
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             None intraop

                     Surgical time           0.5–1 h

                     EBL                     Minimal

                     Postop care             Topical antibiotic ointment

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Lid malposition
                                             Infection: Very rare
                                             Corneal injury
                                             Local postop bleeding

                     Pain score              1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age, but most common in older adults

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common in elderly patients

                     Etiology                Congenital; aging; malignancy; facial nerve palsy

                     Associated              Systemic diseases of elderly patients common; cardiovascular disease; diabetes; HTN;
                       conditions            neurological disease

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC (adult), p. 158, or for Pediatric Oph-
                   thalmic Surgery, p. 1199.

===== PAGE 152 =====
152        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                          Figure 2-4. In the tarsal strip procedure, the lower eyelid is incised laterally. The entire
                                          lower crus of the canthal tendon must be severed. (Redrawn with permission from
                                          Duane’s Ophthalmology, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013.)

                             Suggested Reading
                                1. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.

                             ENTROPION REPAIR
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Entropion is a condition characterized by an inward rotation of the eyelid margin. The surgical approach
                             depends on the underlying anatomic abnormality, which can be congenital, spastic, involutional, or cicatricial (scarring).
                             For the more common involutional or age-related cases, the primary defect involves horizontal lid laxity, disinsertion of
                             the lower lid retractors, and/or an overriding orbicularis muscle. Correction often involves use of the lateral tarsal strip
                             procedure (see description under Ectropion Repair) to achieve tightening of the lower lid. Reattachment of the eyelid
                             retractor muscles/aponeurosis may also be used in certain cases, either alone or in addition to a tarsal strip procedure.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: Cicatricial entropion results from a contracting scar of the tarsus and/or
                             conjunctiva pulling the lid margin inward. Correction requires release of this tension and either a lid-splitting pro-
                             cedure with tarsal advancement, rotational grafts, or free mucosal grafts harvested from hard palate. In the latter
                             case, nasal intubation will be required to allow access to the graft site. Quickert procedure involves the placement
                             of 2–3 sutures under local anesthesia to evert the eyelid. Entropion frequently recurs after this procedure.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Entropion of eyelid

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                 Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                               Incision                 Lateral canthal region or area of conjunctival scarring. Mucosal graft may be harvested from
                                                        hard palate.

===== PAGE 153 =====
Ptosis Repair   153

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                 Surgical loupes
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             None intraop

                     Surgical time           0.5–1 h

                                                                                                                                                     Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                     EBL                     Minimal

                     Postop care             Topical antibiotic ointment

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Infection: Very rare
                                             Lid malposition
                                             Local bleeding
                                             Corneal injury

                     Pain score              1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Congenital; aging; inflammation

                     Associated              Cicatricial entropion can be associated with pemphigoid; Stevens-Johnson syndrome (a some-
                       conditions            times fatal form of erythema multiforme); chemical burns; trachoma.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Entropion repair can usually be accomplished as an outpatient procedure using local anesthesia and MAC.
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC (adult), p. 158, or for Pediatric
                   Ophthalmic Surgery, p. 1199.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.

                   Ptosis Repair
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid margin) can be severe enough to obstruct the visual axis. Causes
                   include congenital maldevelopment, mechanical traction, myogenic conditions (e.g., dystrophies, myasthenia gra-
                   vis), neurogenic conditions (e.g., Horner’s syndrome, cranial nerve III palsy), actinic skin changes and aponeurotic
                   dehiscence. The surgical approach depends primarily on the presence or absence of adequate levator muscle function
                   that is responsible for elevating the upper eyelid. The most common etiology is age-related dehiscence or disinser-
                   tion of the levator aponeurosis from its normal attachment to the tarsus. Because levator muscle function is usually
                   satisfactory in these patients, surgical correction involves reinserting the aponeurosis to the anterior tarsus alone
                   or in combination with shortening of the aponeurosis by advancement or resection. Access is obtained by an inci-
                   sion in the upper eyelid crease. Removal of excess skin and orbicularis muscle (blepharoplasty) may be performed
                   simultaneously. Although several formulas have been devised to determine the amount of aponeurotic shortening,
                   intraop measurement usually is performed to ensure that the appropriate lid position and contour are achieved. This

===== PAGE 154 =====
154        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                                                                          Sling sutures
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                          Figure 2-5. Frontalis sling (modified Crawford technique). Note location of brow
                                          and lid incisions and double rhomboid fascial slings. (Redrawn with permission from
                                          Duane’s Ophthalmology, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013.)

                             requires that the procedure be performed under local anesthesia and that the patient be positioned and draped in a
                             way that allows him/her to sit upright during surgery. Incisions are closed, and crease reformation can be performed
                             if desired.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: In patients with levator muscle function that is not adequate to achieve eyelid
                             elevation, a frontalis sling procedure is performed to elevate the upper eyelid (Fig. 2-5). More commonly required
                             in children with congenital ptosis, this allows the patient to open the eye by elevating the brow. A variety of materials
                             can be used to accomplish this suspension, including silicon rods or fascia. In children , 3 yr, autologous fascia lata
                             can be harvested from the outer thigh from hip to knee. The material is tunneled beneath the skin and muscle from
                             the brow incisions to the anterior tarsal region of the eyelid using Wright needles. After appropriate contour and
                             height are achieved, the sling is secured and incisions are closed. Frontalis suspension usually is performed under
                             GA in both adults and children.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Ptosis

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                               Incision                Upper eyelid crease; brow; and lateral thigh (frontalis sling)

                               Special                 Surgical loupes
                                 instrumentation

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time           0.5–1 h

                               EBL                     Minimal

                               Postop care             Topical antibiotic ointment; cool compresses

                               Mortality               Rare

===== PAGE 155 =====
Eyelid Reconstruction    155

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity               Lid malposition (overcorrection, undercorrection, asymmetry)
                                             Corneal exposure (lagophthalmos)
                                             Infection: More common with silicone rods
                                             Numbness below incision

                     Pain score              1–2

                                                                                                                                                          Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any Age

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Congenital; aponeurotic; neurogenic; myogenic; mechanical; aging

                     Associated              Neurogenic causes associated with myasthenia gravis; myogenic causes include chronic exter-
                       conditions            nal ophthalmoplegia (can have dysrhythmias and Sz disorders); oculopharyngeal dystrophy

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Ptosis repair typically requires GA for infants and children and can be accomplished with local anesthesia (± subcu-
                   taneous epinephrine) and MAC as an outpatient procedure in adults. The need for patient cooperation during the
                   surgery should be discussed with the surgeon and patient in advance. See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic
                   Surgical Procedures under MAC, p. 158.
                   Suggested Reading
                     1. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.

                   Eyelid Reconstruction
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Given the relatively small tissue area of the eyelids and their importance in both ocular health and cos-
                   mesis, excision of lid tumors often requires some form of reconstructive surgery. For lesions suspected of being malig-
                   nant, frozen-sections are often performed prior to closing the defect. In addition, Mohs technique (microscopically
                   controlled serial excision) may be performed (usually by a dermatologist) to achieve clear margins, with reconstruction
                   undertaken during a separate operation. During closure of full-thickness defects that involve the eyelid margin, atten-
                   tion is focused on aligning the lid in all dimensions (Fig. 2-6), while avoiding exposed sutures on the conjunctival surface
                   that might damage the cornea. For small lid defects involving , ¼ of the lid length, direct closure often can be accom-
                   plished with release of the lateral canthal tendon (canthotomy and cantholysis) to reduce wound tension, if necessary.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Larger excisions often require grafting techniques that are designed to replace
                   both the anterior (skin/orbicularis) and posterior (tarsus/conjunctiva) lamellae of the eyelid. This can be accom-
                   plished with rotational grafts, a tarsoconjunctival advancement flap or free grafts of cartilage, hard palate, cadaver
                   sclera, or composite grafts as posterior lamellar replacement materials.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Basal-cell carcinoma; squamous-cell carcinoma; melanoma; sebaceous carcinoma; or trauma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision                Upper and/or lower eyelid. Postauricular, supraclavicular, or hard palate if graft harvesting
                                             required

===== PAGE 156 =====
156        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Special                 Surgical loupes
                                 instrumentation

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time           0.5–2 h
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                               EBL                     Minimal

                               Postop care             Topical antibiotic ointment; cool compresses; pressure dressing

                               Mortality               Rare

                               Morbidity               Graft failure
                                                       Lid deformity
                                                       Corneal exposure
                                                       Infection: , 1%

                               Pain score              2–3

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               Usually elderly

                               Male:Female             1:1

                               Incidence               Common

                               Etiology                Sun exposure-related malignancy

                               Associated              Diseases of the elderly, including cardiovascular disease, HTN, and diabetes
                                 conditions

                                          Figure 2-6. Closure of full-thickness defect in the lower lid. The tarsal sutures and
                                          half-thickness tarsus are placed first, with the secondary closures at points A, B, C, and
                                          the eyelid margin. (Reproduced with permission from McCord CD, Tanenbaum M,
                                          eds: Oculoplastic Surgery, 2nd edition. Raven Press, New York: 1987.)

===== PAGE 157 =====
Pterygium Excision   157

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Eyelid reconstruction can often be accomplished with local anesthesia and MAC. See Anesthetic Considerations for
                   Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC, p. 158.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Codner MA, Weinfeld AB: Comprehensive eyelid reconstruction. ANZ J Surg 2007; 77(Suppl 1):A71.

                                                                                                                                                      Ophthalmic
                     2. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                   Pterygium Excision
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pterygia are fibrovascular growths that originate in the limbal conjunctiva within the palpebral fissure
                   and grow into the superficial layer of the cornea. They often produce refractive changes and/or obstruct the central
                   visual axis and, thus, require removal. Although this procedure is often performed in the clinic or minor-procedure
                   room, larger lesions may require an OR. In both settings, local anesthesia is applied both topically (tetracaine 0.5%)
                   and subconjunctivally (lidocaine 2%). The lesion is dissected from the cornea and from the surrounding healthy
                   conjunctiva, leaving a bed of bare sclera that may or may not be closed primarily (Fig. 2-7).
                   Variant procedure or approaches: For larger excisions and to decrease the rate of recurrence, conjunctival trans-
                   position or free-graft techniques can be used to cover the area of bare sclera. Topical antimetabolites, such as mito-
                   mycin-C, also may be applied to prevent recurrence. Recently, a method known as P.E.R.F.E.C.T. (pterygium extended
                   removal followed by extended conjunctival transplant) has been employed to reduce the long-term recurrence rate.
                   Preop diagnosis or indications: Pterygium

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision               Interpalpebral area adjacent to involved limbus

                     Special                Operating microscope
                       instrumentation
                     Antibiotics            Topical postop

                     Surgical time          15–45 min

                     EBL                    Minimal

                     Postop care            Topical antibiotic ointment

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Recurrence: 37%, without adjunctive therapy or grafting, < 1% with P.E.R.F.E.C.T. method
                                            Extraocular muscle injury (higher risk in re-op eyes)
                                            Cyst
                                            Local bleeding
                                            Infection

                     Pain score             1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Usually young-to-middle age

                     Male:Female            1:1

===== PAGE 158 =====
158        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                               Incidence               Common

                               Etiology                Related to sun exposure with higher rate in latitudes near the equator

                             Suggested Readings
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                1. Ang LP, Chua JL, Tan DT: Current concepts and techniques in pterygium treatment. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2007; 18(4):
                                   308–13.
                                2. Hirst LW: Recurrent pterygium surgery using pterygium extended removal followed by extended conjunctival transplant:
                                   recurrence rate and cosmesis. Ophthalmology 2009; 116(7):1278–86.

                                   
                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR OPHTHALMIC SURGICAL
                                   PROCEDURES UNDER MAC
                             (Procedures covered: cataract extraction and other procedures; corneal transplant; trabeculectomy; ectropi-
                             on-entropion repair; ptosis surgery; eyelid reconstruction; pterygium excision)

                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Ophthalmic procedures that are of relatively short duration and those that result in minimal blood loss are being per-
                             formed increasingly more often on an outpatient basis, usually with topical or regional anesthesia (e.g., retrobulbar or
                             peribulbar blocks) under MAC (see p. B-5). Retrobulbar and peribulbar injections achieve excellent anesthesia and
                             provide equal degrees of akinesia. Given the associated risk of inadvertent intrathecal injection of anesthetic, orbital
                             hemorrhage, need for heavy sedation during injection, and delayed return of visual function postop, most cataract sur-
                             geries are performed using topical anesthesia. An additional benefit is that the bleeding risk is lower and the procedure
                             can be performed safely in most patients taking anticoagulants or with bleeding disorders. Although satisfactory pain
                             relief usually is achieved with this method, the lack of akinesia requires a highly cooperative patient to prevent sud-
                             den eye movements during surgery. Some surgeons will supplement topical anesthesia with intracameral lidocaine

                                          Figure 2-7. Bare sclera excision can be started from the corneal apex or by incising
                                          around the conjunctival body of the pterygium. (Redrawn with permission from
                                          Duane’s Clinical Ophthalmology, Vol 6. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

===== PAGE 159 =====
Pterygium Excision       159

                   (injections into the anterior chamber), although this has not been proven better than topical anesthetics alone in
                   terms of patient comfort and satisfaction. Sub-Tenon’s injection is another anesthetic technique used by many
                   surgeons as a compromise between topical application and orbital injections. After preop application of topical
                   anesthetics, a small incision is made in the bulbar conjunctiva, exposing the episcleral (sub-Tenon’s) space. A blunt
                   cannula is inserted under direct visualization and local anesthetic injected into the episcleral space. The main benefit
                   is that no sharp needle is used, thereby reducing the risk of intrathecal injection and orbital hemorrhage from vessel
                   injury. The onset of akinesia, however, is often delayed, and this technique still has the disadvantage of delayed return

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                   of postop visual function.
                   The pain on injection is slightly less with peribulbar blocks or sub-Tenon blocks as compared with retrobulbar
                   techniques. For many patients, placement of the intravenous cannula was the most painful event during eye sur-
                   gery, suggesting that some eye blocks are well tolerated. Intraoperative pain is significantly less with retrobulbar or
                   peribulbar blocks than with topical anesthesia. Rates of ocular perforation following injection blocks are low (1 in
                   1000–10,000).
                   Because the majority of ocular procedures are performed on elderly patients, multiple coexisting medical illnesses
                   are often present. A thorough preop H&P along with appropriate ancillary studies are mandatory even though local
                   anesthesia/MAC is planned. Contraindications to regional anesthesia/MAC for ocular surgery may include uncon-
                   trolled movement disorder, bleeding diathesis, open-eye injuries, claustrophobia, chronic cough (or other Valsalva-
                   producing conditions), symptomatic gastric reflux, inability to lie flat, inability to communicate or cooperate, or
                   patient refusal.

                    Respiratory                  Elderly patients have increased incidence of hiatal hernia and, therefore, are at increased
                                                 risk for pulmonary aspiration. Assess the patient’s ability to lie flat for the duration of
                                                 the procedure. Patients with chronic cough may require GA.
                                                 Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular               Hx of HTN, CAD, CHF, or poor exercise tolerance should prompt a thorough investi-
                                                 gation into the patient’s cardiac status, including efficacy of current medications and
                                                 recent ECG (compared with previous ECGs). Consultation with a cardiologist may be
                                                 appropriate to optimize the patient’s condition before surgery. Patients on antithrom-
                                                 botic drugs may be at higher risk for bleeding complications. The decision to stop these
                                                 drugs and institute heparin bridge therapy should be made in consultation with both
                                                 the surgeon and the prescribing physician.
                                                 Tests: ECG; others (e.g., ECHO) as indicated from H&P

                    Diabetes                     Diabetic patients are at increased risk for silent myocardial ischemia. Pulmonary aspi-
                                                 ration 28 diabetic gastroparesis is also a risk in this population. Patients usually take
                                                 1/2 of their normal intermediate or long-acting insulin dose on the morning of sur-
                                                 gery; fasting blood sugar is checked; and an iv infusion of D5 LR is started if glucose
                                                 , 90 mg/dL, or treated with regular insulin if glucose . 200 mg/dL. Blood glucose is
                                                 checked intraop and postop. Patients on insulin pumps should maintain their basal infu-
                                                 sion rate and eliminate preprandial boluses. The anesthesiologist should ask the patient
                                                 about their insulin sensitivity (the amount of insulin necessary to ↓ blood glucose by
                                                 50 mg/dL). Blood glucose should be monitored hourly.

                    Musculoskeletal              Arthritic changes make lying flat difficult for some patients. Careful positioning and
                                                 padding are essential. A low-level remifentanil infusion (,0.05 mcg/kg/min) may be
                                                 helpful in some cases.

                    Neurological                 Patients with tremor, agitation, severe anxiety, cognitive impairment, or inability to
                                                 cooperate are not appropriate candidates for regional anesthesia/MAC.

                    Hematologic                  3 for antiplatelet or anticoagulant drug use, particularly in patients undergoing lid
                                                 or orbital procedures where both the risks and consequences of hemorrhage may be
                                                 significant.
                                                 Tests: As indicated from H&P (e.g., PT if patient is on anticoagulant).

                    Laboratory                   As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 160 =====
160        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                              Premedication                    Patients will benefit from a detailed explanation of events prior to surgery (including
                                                               iv placement, application of monitors, performance of local block, ocular compres-
                                                               sion, prepping eye, draping of the whole face, and provision of supplemental air/O2)
                                                               and the assurance that the anesthesiologist will always be present, monitoring them.
                                                               Midazolam (0.5–1 mg iv) is often beneficial. For patients with increased risk of aspira-
                                                               tion (e.g., with hiatal hernia or diabetic gastroparesis) and for obese and/or very anxious
                                                               patients, metoclopramide 10 mg iv may enhance gastric emptying.
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                  INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: MAC (see p. B-5). Topical anesthesia typically is accomplished by the ophthalmologist,
                             often using long lasting LA, supplemented with 2% lidocaine with epinephrine, injected subconjunctivally. Place-
                             ment of retrobulbar or peribulbar blocks may be painful, and very short-acting agents (e.g., remifentanil 0.25–1 mcg/
                             kg, alfentanil 5–7 mcg/kg, or propofol 30–50 mg) should be administered to minimize patient discomfort. Dose
                             requirements vary significantly among patients, and the anesthesiologist should be prepared to treat sudden ↓ BP
                             and apnea. Usually, further sedation is unnecessary and may interfere with patient cooperation during the surgery.
                             Coughing, or other Valsalva maneuvers, should be avoided during the procedure, and the anesthesiologist must al-
                             ways be prepared to administer GA if necessary. If it is possible that cautery may be used during the surgery, then the
                             delivered FiO2 should be < 0.3 to minimize fire hazard when using open oxygen delivery methods (e.g., nasal prongs,
                             mask, etc.).
                             Retrobulbar block: Using a 25- or 27-ga needle (1.5”), the retrobulbar space is approached from the infratemporal
                             quadrant of the orbit. The eye should be in a neutral position. Once the needle is positioned and there is no return
                             of blood or CSF on aspiration, 3–5 mL of anesthetic solution is injected slowly. A facial nerve block is necessary to
                             prevent eyelid movement. This can be accomplished by injecting 4–8 mL of anesthetic solution above and below the

                                                                                                                         Bony orbit

                                                                                                                         Peribulbar block

                                                                                                                         Sclera
                                                                                                                         Tenon capsule
                                                                                                                         (Anterior fascial sheath)

                                                                                                                         Sub-Tenon block

                                                                                                                         Peribulbar block

                                                 Intraocular
                                                  muscles
                                                                 Optic nerve                                             Retrobulbar
                                                                                                                         (intra-conal)
                                                                                                                          block
                                                                                  Bony orbit

                                       Figure 2-8. Horizontal section of the orbit illustrating regional blocks. There is
                                       continuum between the episcleral (sub-Tenon) space and the rectus muscle sheaths.

===== PAGE 161 =====
Pterygium Excision       161

                   lateral aspect of the orbit. Typically, the anesthetic solution consists of a 50:50 mixture of 0.5–0.75% bupivacaine
                   and 2% lidocaine ± hyaluronidase, ± epinephrine 1:400,000.
                   Peribulbar block: Using a 25- or 27-ga needle (5/8”–1”), 6–8 mL of anesthetic solution is injected into the peribul-
                   bar space, entering just superior to the inferior rim of the orbit at the junction of the lateral and middle thirds of the
                   lower lid. Orbital compression is usually applied to facilitate spread of local anesthetic. Although perforation of the
                   globe and hemorrhage are still possible, direct injury to the optic nerve and subdural injection are not likely due to
                   the length and position of the needle. Peribulbar blocks generally have a slower onset than retrobulbar blocks and are

                                                                                                                                                        Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                   more likely to cause conjunctival swelling, which may interfere with surgery.
                   Sub-Tenon’s anesthesia: Injection of LA (often 1% lidocaine ± epi) through a 22-ga cannula into the space below
                   Tenon’s capsule (episcleral membrane) produces ocular anesthesia in many ways similar to retrobulbar block. How-
                   ever, the onset is slower and akinesia is less reliable. The usual injection volume is 3–5 mL with more necessary if
                   akinesia is required. Unlike retrobulbar block, significant complications with the technique are extremely rare.

                    Blood and fluid              IV: 18–20 ga 3 1                         Excessive fluids → bladder distention → ↑ BP,
                       requirements              NS/LR @ 1.5–3 mL/kg/h                    agitation

                    Monitoring                   Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          It is important to remain in communication with
                                                 Verbal response                          the patient throughout the procedure. (Take
                                                                                          care to avoid evoking head movement.)

                    Positioning                  3 and pad pressure points                Place pillows under knees to relieve back strain.
                                                 3 nonoperated eye

                    Complications                Dysrhythmias, especially ↓HR             Usually 28 traction or pressure on ocular/
                                                                                          periocular tissues. Rx: stop surgical stimulation
                                                 ↑ BP                                     28 anxiety, pain, phenylephrine eye drops. Rx:
                                                                                          reassurance, local anesthetics, labetalol 5 mg or
                                                                                          hydralazine 2.5-mg increments, as appropriate.
                                                 Retrobulbar hemorrhage (1–3%)            Rx: pressure bandage; usually cancel surgery
                                                 Globe perforation                        If a needle perforation, usually no repair is
                                                                                          necessary.
                                                 Convulsions 28 iv local anesthetic       Supportive treatment with IPPV; cancel surgery
                                                 Respiratory/circulatory arrest           28 subarachnoid anesthetic injection. Rx: CPR,
                                                                                          IPPV
                                                 Oculocardiac reflex (OCR)                OCR: traction on EOM’s → ↓↓ HR, ↓↓ BP, ven-
                                                                                          tricular ectopy, asystole. Rarely occurs during
                                                                                          GA or following adequate retrobulbar block.
                                                                                          Rx: stop surgical manipulation, atropine for
                                                                                          persistent bradycardia, CPR.

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications                Myocardial ischemia                      Rx: Provide O2; 3 BP; 3 ECG; cardiology con-
                                                                                          sultation. Rx may include sublingual NTG, aspi-
                                                 Corneal abrasion                         rin, β-blocker, MS.
                                                 Photophobia
                                                 N/V                                      Rx: Ondansetron 4 mg iv
                                                 Diplopia

                    Pain management              Acetaminophen 325–1000 mg po

===== PAGE 162 =====
162        s e c t i o n 2.0       Ophthalmic Surgery

                              Table 2-1. Commonly Used Ophthalmic Drugs and Their Systemic Effects
                              Phenylephrine                  An α-adrenergic agonist that causes mydriasis (pupillary dilation) and vasoconstriction to aid
                                                             ocular surgery; however, it also can precipitate significant HTN and dysrhythmias.
                              Echothiophate                  An irreversible cholinesterase inhibitor used in glaucoma treatment to cause miosis and ↓ IOP.
                                                             Its systemic absorption can reduce plasma cholinesterase activity and thereby prolong paralysis
                                                             2º to succinylcholine (usually not more than 20–30 min).
     Ophthalmic

                              Timolol                        A nonselective β-blocker that decreases production of aqueous humor → ↓ IOP. Rarely, it may
      Surgery

                                                             be associated with atropine-resistant bradycardia, asthma, CHF, and ↓ BP.
                              Acetazolamide                  A carbonic anhydrase inhibitor used to ↓ IOP. It also can cause diuresis and a hypokalemic
                                                             metabolic acidosis.
                              Betaxolol                      A relatively oculospecific β-blocker used to ↓ IOP. Effects may be additive to systemic β-blockers.
                              Cyclopentolate                 A commonly used mydriatic with the potential for CNS toxicity, including Sz, psychotic reactions,
                                                             and dysarthria.
                              Atropine                       An anticholinergic that produces mydriasis to aid with ocular examination and surgery. It also can
                                                             precipitate central anticholinergic syndrome. (Sx range from dry mouth, tachycardia, agitation,
                                                             delirium, and hallucinations to unconsciousness.) Physostigmine 0.01–0.03 mg/kg will increase
                                                             central acetylcholine and reverse the symptoms. (It may be repeated after 15–30 min.)
                              Apraclonidine                  An α-2 adrenergic agonist used to treat glaucoma (↓ aqueous formation + ↑ outflow). Systemic
                                                             absorption → sedation, drowsiness. Hypotension is possible.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1.    Ashwin PT, Shah S, Wolffsohn JS: Advances in cataract surgery. Clin Exp Optom 2009; 92(4):333–42.
                                2.    Malik A, Fletcher EC, Chong V, Dasan J: Local anesthesia for cataract surgery. J Cataract Refract Surg 2010; 36(1):133–52.
                                3.    Rogers GM, Goins KM: Cataract surgery in the patient that can not lie flat. Curr Opin Opthalmol 2010; 21(1):71–4.
                                4.    Sanmugasunderam S, Khalfan A: Is fasting required before cataract surgery? A retrospective review. Can J Ophthalmol 2009;
                                      44(6):655–6.

                             Repair of Ruptured or Lacerated Globe
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: A ruptured globe involves a tear of either the corneal or scleral layers of the eye and can occur in
                             the setting of blunt, penetrating, or perforating trauma. The primary goal of surgical repair is to replace extruded
                             intraocular contents, close defects, and remove any foreign body. Orbital CT scans are performed preop to aid in
                             the identification of the latter. To reduce the risk of causing further damage, complete examination of the eye is
                             often delayed until the patient is in the controlled setting of the OR under GA. Although anterior injuries are readily
                             identifiable, posterior injuries may require extensive exploration that can require a 3608 opening of the conjunctiva
                             and isolation of each extraocular muscle to allow adequate inspection of the entire scleral surface. Corneal lacera-
                             tions usually are closed with 10-0 nylon sutures while 8-0 nylon or Vicryl may be used for scleral tissue. Until these
                             wounds are closed, it is crucial that Valsalva maneuvers (which raise IOP), be avoided to prevent further extrusion
                             of intraocular contents.
                             Variant procedures or approaches: After globe integrity has been established, other associated injuries may
                             be addressed, including repair of conjunctival lacerations, extraocular muscle injuries/detachments, retinal detach-
                             ments, or removal of a traumatic cataract.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Ruptured globe

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                    Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                               Incision                    Conjunctival peritomy (3608 conjunctival incision) to allow exposure of posterior sclera

===== PAGE 163 =====
Repair of Ruptured or Lacerated Globe    163

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                Operating microscope
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics            IV gentamicin (80 mg) and cefazolin (1 g); subconjunctival and topical antibiotics

                     Closing                Avoid Valsalva-like maneuvers (coughing, bucking, etc.)

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                       considerations

                     Surgical time          1–2 h

                     EBL                    Minimal

                     Postop care            Hospital admission for iv antibiotics

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Wound leak
                                            Infection: Rate depends on injury
                                            Sympathetic ophthalmia: Rare
                                            Retinal detachment
                                            Suprachoroidal hemorrhage

                     Pain score             4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range               Usually , 40 yr

                    Male:Female             8:1 (as a result of recreational and occupational preferences)

                    Incidence               Common (~2 million eye injuries in US per year with ~40,000 resulting in vision loss)

                    Etiology                Work- or sports-related injury; motor vehicle accidents

                    Associated              Intoxication; orbital/facial trauma; head injury
                      conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   This is a generally healthy patient population; however, patients with penetrating eye injuries present the anesthe-
                   siologist with two special challenges: (1) They invariably have full stomachs, resulting in risk of aspiration. (2) They
                   are at risk of blindness 28 ↑ IOP → loss of ocular contents, which may be a result of coughing, crying, and/or strug-
                   gling during induction. Normal IOP ranges from 10–22 mm Hg, depending on the rates of formation and drainage
                   of aqueous humor, choroidal blood volume, scleral rigidity, extraocular muscle tone, as well as extrinsic pressure
                   on the eye (e.g., a poorly fitting mask or retrobulbar hematoma). Patient movement, coughing, straining, vomiting,
                   hypercarbia, HTN, and ET intubation may ↑ IOP to 40 mm Hg or more.

                    Full-stomach                Consider patient to have a full stomach if the injury occurred within 8 h of the last meal.
                      precautions               Pain and anxiety due to trauma will delay gastric emptying. Goal is to minimize risk of
                                                aspiration pneumonitis by decreasing gastric volume and acidity. Consider premedication
                                                with metoclopramide (10–20 mg iv), antacids such as Na citrate (15–30 mL po, imme-
                                                diately prior to induction), and H2-histamine receptor antagonists (ranitidine [50 mg iv,
                                                ~15 min before induction]). H2-histamine receptor antagonists, however, have no effect
                                                on the pH of gastric secretions present in the stomach prior to administration and are,
                                                therefore, of limited value in patients presenting for emergency surgery. If patient has Hx
                                                of smoking or is an asthmatic, consider preop use of inhalers such as albuterol (2–4 puffs).

===== PAGE 164 =====
164        s e c t i o n 2.0   Ophthalmic Surgery

                              Associated injuries        A ruptured globe may be only one of multiple injuries to the head and neck or other
                                                         structures. Other injuries should be excluded preoperatively.

                              Laboratory                 Tests as indicated from H&P

                              Premedication              Patients often are very anxious and may benefit from benzodiazepines (e.g., for pediat-
                                                         ric population, midazolam 0.5–0.75 mg/kg po in cola or apple juice, 15–30 mL). Avoid
     Ophthalmic

                                                         narcotic premedication, which may ↑ nausea and possibility of emesis.
      Surgery

                                  INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GETA. Regional anesthesia (e.g., retrobulbar block) is contraindicated in patients with open-
                             eye injury because of ↑ IOP, which may accompany injection of local anesthetic behind the globe. Thus, despite
                             the increased risk of aspiration from a full stomach, GETA is recommended. In patients where the risk of GA is
                             unacceptably high (e.g., extensive pulmonary or unstable cardiac disease) surgical repair can be accomplished using
                             topical anesthesia (see Auffarth GU, et al.).

                              Induction                  To protect the airway and prevent ↑ IOP, a rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure
                                                         and a smooth intubation are required. Although the choice of induction agent is relatively
                                                         straightforward—propofol 1–2 mg/kg—the choice of neuromuscular blocking agents
                                                         for facilitating intubation is controversial. Succinylcholine provides a rapid onset, short
                                                         duration of action, and excellent intubating conditions, but it also transiently increases
                                                         IOP (~9 mm Hg). This minor ↑ IOP is usually attenuated by pretreatment with a non-
                                                         depolarizing agent (e.g., rocuronium) followed by propofol induction. Rocuronium
                                                         (1.2 mg/kg) produces muscle relaxation in 1–2 min and may be a satisfactory alterna-
                                                         tive to succinylcholine; however, a premature attempt at intubation may significantly
                                                         ↑ IOP as a result of coughing and straining. Of interest, there are no reports in the
                                                         literature documenting exacerbation of eye injuries with the use of succinylcholine
                                                         following pretreatment with a NMR. Given that the anesthesiologist’s main concern
                                                         is safe airway management, the following is a suggested induction plan:
                                                         (1) Preoxygenation, avoiding external pressure on the eye from face mask
                                                         (2) Pretreatment with a nondepolarizing relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 0.06–0.12 mg/kg or
                                                         equivalent), followed by iv lidocaine (1 mg/kg) and fentanyl (2–3 mcg/kg) to blunt the
                                                         cardiovascular response to laryngoscopy and intubation
                                                         (3) 4 min later, with cricoid pressure, induce with propofol (1–2 mg/kg) and succinyl-
                                                         choline (1.5 mg/kg). Intubate with oral RAE tube. Note: for pediatric patients, it might
                                                         be appropriate to induce with sevoflurane while maintaining cricoid pressure and intu-
                                                         bating when the patient is deeply anesthetized. Trying to start an iv prior to induction
                                                         may precipitate struggling and crying, leading to further eye injury.

                              Maintenance                Standard maintenance or TIVA (see p. B-3). Avoid hypercapnia, which → ↑ IOP. Muscle
                                                         relaxation is mandatory until the eye is surgically closed. Humidify gases for pediatric
                                                         patients. Avoid N2O in patients receiving intraocular gas injection.

                              Emergence                  Decompress the stomach with OG tube. Goal is smooth emergence and extubation with
                                                         patient awake with intact airway reflexes. IV lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) 5 min before extuba-
                                                         tion; posterior pharyngeal suctioning with patient deeply anesthetized, combined with
                                                         a small amount of narcotic (remifentanil ,1 mcg/kg), may blunt cough reflex prior
                                                         to extubation. The common occurrence of PONV requires administration of intraop
                                                         antiemetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv, and ondansetron 4 mg iv 30 min before
                                                         end of surgery).

                              Blood and fluid            IV: 18–20 ga 31 (adult)                 Warm fluids if large volume will be administered.
                                 requirements            20 ga 31 (child)
                                                         NS/LR @ 5–10 mL/kg/h

===== PAGE 165 =====
Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR)            165

                    Monitoring                    Standard monitors (see p. B-1).             Neuromuscular blockade must be monitored
                                                                                              closely and additional relaxant given as nec-
                                                                                              essary to prevent patient movement during
                                                                                              surgery.

                    Positioning                   3 and pad pressure points
                                                  3 nonoperated eye

                                                                                                                                                               Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                    Complications                 ↑ IOP with extrusion of intraocular         IOP (normal = ,10–22 mm Hg) increased by:
                                                  contents                                    blink = 10–15 mm Hg; forced lid closure = . 70
                                                  Aspiration of gastric contents              mm Hg.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications                 N/V                                         Rx: Metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv, droperidol
                                                                                              0.625 mg iv (with due respect to the black-box
                                                                                              warning), ondansetron 4 mg iv
                                                  Aspiration pneumonitis                      Provide O2 by face mask, if not intubated. Follow
                                                  Photophobia                                 O2 sat. 3 CXR.
                                                  Diplopia
                                                  Hemorrhagic retinopathy
                                                  Corneal abrasion

                    Pain management               Acetaminophen                               Occasionally, parenteral opiates (see p. C-3).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Auffarth GU, Vargas LG, Klett J, et al: Repair of a ruptured globe using topical anesthesia. J Cataract Refract Surg 2004;
                        30(3):726–9.
                     2. Boscia F, La Tegola MG, Columbo G, et al: Combined topical anesthesia and sedation for open-globe injuries in selected
                        patients. Ophthalmology 2003; 110(8):1555–9.
                     3. Chidiac EJ, Raiskin AO: Succinylcholine and the open eye. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 2006; 19(2):279–85.
                     4. Kumar C, Doods C, Fanning G, eds: Ophthalmic Anaesthesia. Swets and Zeitlinger BV, Lisse: 2002.
                     5. McGoldrick KE, Gayer S: Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical Anesthesia,
                        6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009.
                     6. Vachon CA, Warner DO, Bacon DR: Succinylcholine and the open globe. Tracing the teaching. Anesthesiology 2003; 99:220–3.

                   Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR)
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) is performed for patients with symptomatic obstruction of the na-
                   solacrimal duct (NLD) and is commonly associated with chronic dacryocystitis. The procedure is designed to create
                   a fistula from the common canaliculus to the nasopharynx, which bypasses the site of obstruction. This involves
                   removal of bone adjacent to the nasolacrimal sac and incorporating the sac with the lateral nasal mucosa. DCR can
                   be performed under GA or local anesthesia (subcutaneous [equal mixture of 1–2% lidocaine and 0.5% bupivacaine
                   with 1:100k epinephrine] and nasal cavity cocaine 4%) with most patients preferring local anesthesia. Intranasal
                   phenylephrine and/or cocaine pledgets are often placed to decrease mucosal bleeding. A skin incision is made below
                   the medial canthal tendon that is extended to the lacrimal fossa with blunt dissection. Bleeding can be excessive if
                   the angular vessels are injured. The now exposed periosteum is incised, and a 1.5 cm 3 1.5 cm osteotomy is created
                   with a burr and/or Kerrison punch, exiting at the level of the middle meatus. A Crawford lacrimal probe attached to
                   silicone tubing is inserted into the superior punctum and advanced into the lacrimal sac, which is then opened along

===== PAGE 166 =====
166        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                             its medial wall. Following incision of the nasal mucosa through the osteotomy, the posterior flap of the lacrimal sac is
                             sutured to the posterior nasal mucosa flap. The probe is advanced through the osteotomy and into the middle meatus,
                             where it is retrieved through the nare. The second end of the probe is advanced along the same path but beginning
                             through the inferior punctum. The ends of the silicone tubing are tied together in the nare and the anterior flaps of
                             lacrimal sac and nasal mucosa are sutured together. Thrombin and gel foam can be used to control mucosal bleeding,
                             and the skin is reapproximated after ensuring hemostasis. Meticulous hemostasis is essential to a successful outcome.
                             Variant procedures or approaches: If the lacrimal obstruction is more proximal to the lacrimal sac, a Jones tube
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                             can be placed (Fig. 2-9), creating an artificial lumen from the conjunctiva to the nasopharynx to bypass the entire
                             nasolacrimal drainage system. An endonasal approach using a rigid endoscopic 6 laser offers the advantage of no
                              skin incision, good visualization of intranasal pathology and less postop discomfort. The endoscopic approach is
                              more common in children and young adults where the absence of skin creases makes scar concealment difficult.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: NLD obstruction

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position               Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                               Incision               15 mm, just below medial canthus (Fig. 2-10)

                               Special                Headlight; surgical loupes
                                 instrumentation

                               Unique                 Nasal packing with phenylephrine/4% cocaine/lidocaine. Blood may drain into upper airway
                                 considerations       during surgery

                               Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time          1–1.5 h

                               EBL                    100–200 mL

                               Postop care            Outpatient tube removal required

                               Mortality              Rare

                               Morbidity              Failure to drain
                                                      Bleeding: 5%
                                                      Infection: , 1%
                                                      Cerebrospinal fluid leak

                               Pain score             3–4 (Pain scores are lower following local anesthesia compared to GA.)

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range              30–70 yr

                               Male:Female            1:1

                               Incidence              Common

                               Etiology               Adults: Usually scarring from prior infection or trauma
                                                      Children: Congenital or prior infection

                               Associated             Deviated septum; nasal polyps; nasopharyngeal masses; congenital anomalies
                                 conditions

                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             DCR can be performed with local anesthetic and MAC or under GA depending on patient and surgeon preferences.
                             See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under MAC: p. 158 or GA: p. 170.

===== PAGE 167 =====
Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR)   167

                                                                                          Jone’s tube

                                                                                                                                     Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                                            Nasopharynx

                               Figure 2-9. Insertion of a Pyrex Jones tube. (Reproduced with permission from
                               McCord CD, Tanenbaum M, Nunery WR: Oculoplastic Surgery. Raven Press: 1995.)

                               Figure 2-10. Linear skin incision for a standard DCR. (Reproduced with permission
                               from Wright KW: Textbook of Ophthalmology. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 168 =====
168        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Madge SN, Selva D: Intubation in routine dacryocystorhinostomy: why we do what we do. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2009;
                                   37(6):620–3.
                                2. Watkins LM, Janfaza P, Rubin PA: The evolution of endonasal dacryocystorhinostomy. Surg Ophthalmol 2003; 48(1):73–84.
                                3. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                             Enucleation
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Enucleation involves removal of the entire globe and a portion of the optic nerve. It usually is per-
                             formed for painful blind eyes or intraocular tumors (e.g., retinoblastoma, melanoma). If possible, the surrounding
                             ocular adnexa, including the conjunctiva, Tenon’s connective tissue, and extraocular muscles, are left in place to
                             secure an orbital implant. The procedure begins with a 3608 conjunctival incision (peritomy) at the limbus, allowing
                             exposure of the underlying extraocular muscles and sclera. Each of the recti muscles is isolated with a muscle hook
                             and secured with fixation sutures before disinsertion from the globe. The oblique muscles are cut and allowed to
                             retract into the orbit (Fig. 2-11). A curved clamp is closed across the optic nerve ,3–10 mm posterior to the globe,
                             and the nerve is cut and the globe removed. After hemostasis has been ensured, an orbital implant (polymethylmeth-
                             acrylate or hydroxyapatite) is placed into the socket. The overlying muscles, connective tissue, and conjunctiva are
                             closed to improve motility and prevent extrusion.

                                        Figure 2-11. Each of the four recti is isolated with 6-0 Dexon suture. The superior
                                        oblique tendon is detached. The inferior oblique is sutured to the inferior border of the
                                        lateral rectus. 4-0 silk traction sutures are in place over the medial and lateral rectus
                                        stump. The globe is rotated laterally, while a curved clamp is introduced from the medial
                                        direction. Either a curved scissors or an enucleation snare may be used to transect
                                        the optic nerve. (Reproduced with permission from McCord CD Jr, Tanenbaum M,
                                        Nunery WR: Oculoplastic Surgery. Raven Press, Philadelphia: 1995.)

===== PAGE 169 =====
Enucleation   169

                   Variant procedure or approaches: Evisceration involves removing all intraocular contents through a corneo-
                   scleral incision, leaving the scleral shell with the attached adnexa in place. This usually is performed in cases of endo-
                   phthalmitis, but never if malignancy is suspected. Exenteration is a more extensive procedure for the management
                   of aggressive malignant tumors or infections where all orbital tissue, often including surrounding orbital bone and
                   adjacent sinuses, is removed. If the extent of orbital tumors is unknown, frozen sections from the surgical margins
                   will be used to determine if exenteration is needed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Painful blind eye; intraocular tumors; sympathetic ophthalmia; trauma

                                                                                                                                                        Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                     Incision                3608 conjunctival (peritomy)

                     Special                 Surgical loupes
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Irrigate socket with gentamicin postop

                     Surgical time           1h

                     EBL                     , 100 mL

                     Postop care             Outpatient

                     Mortality               Rare

                     Morbidity               Extrusion of implant
                                             Infection: , 1%

                     Pain score              3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Relatively common (typically related to eye trauma)

                     Etiology                Trauma; infection; glaucoma; tumors (e.g., retinoblastoma, melanoma); inflammation

                     Associated              Diabetes mellitus
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Ophthalmic Surgical Procedures under GA, p. 170.
                   Suggested Reading
                     1. See Suggested Readings following Ophthalmic Surgery section, p. 176.

===== PAGE 170 =====
170        s e c t i o n 2.0   Ophthalmic Surgery

                             Orbitotomy—Anterior and Lateral
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Surgical access to the orbit is required for biopsy/excision of masses, drainage of orbital abscesses,
     Ophthalmic

                             removal of a foreign body, or repair of orbital fractures, among other procedures. The orbit may be divided into sev-
      Surgery

                             eral compartments, and the surgical approach will vary by the location and size of the lesion. In general, an anterior
                             orbitotomy is used for small tumors in the anterior orbit and can be approached from a transconjunctival, transsep-
                             tal, or transperiosteal incision. By contrast, a lateral orbitotomy allows for removal of larger masses located further
                             posteriorly in the orbit, as well as those lesions involving the lacrimal gland. In this procedure, the skin incision can
                             be placed just under the brow (Stallard-Wright), in the lid crease with lateral extension, or higher in the eyebrow
                             (coronal). The dissection is carried down to the periosteum, which is then incised and reflected. The lateral orbital
                             wall is exposed, and an osteotomy is performed using an oscillating saw, after preplacing suture holes with a power
                             drill. The section of bone is removed with a clamp, and the periorbita is opened, allowing intraorbital dissection.
                             After biopsy or removal of the mass, the periorbita is closed and the bone fragment replaced.

                             Variant procedures or approaches: A medial orbitotomy is often required to access lesions that are located
                             medial to the optic nerve.

                             Usual preop diagnosis: Orbital mass; fractures; foreign body; abscess

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                Supine, table rotated 90–1808

                               Incision                Variable (see above)

                               Special                 Surgical loupes
                                 instrumentation

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time           1–3 h

                               EBL                     Usually minimal, unless vascular tumor

                               Mortality               Rare

                               Morbidity               Orbital hemorrhage (retrobulbar → proptosis, retinal ischemia)
                                                       Impaired ocular motility, strabismus
                                                       Perforation of the globe: < 1:1000 needle blocks
                                                       Loss of vision; optic nerve injury
                                                       Infection: , 1%

                               Pain score              3–6

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               Any age

                               Male:Female             1:1

                               Incidence               Fairly common

                               Etiology                Tumor, such as hemangioma, lymphangioma, lymphoma; lacrimal gland tumors; infection; frac-
                                                       ture; foreign body

                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             (Procedures covered: dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR); enucleation; anterior and lateral orbitotomy)

===== PAGE 171 =====
Retinal Surgery     171

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for DCR, enucleation, and orbitotomy represent a diverse population. These patients are generally
                   healthy, aside from the infection, tumor, or trauma underlying their ocular or periocular pathology. Preop evaluation
                   should focus on possible coexisting disease and the systemic manifestations of previous therapeutic interventions (e.g.,
                   chemotherapy and drugs used to treat glaucoma). NB: Always verify that surgery is performed on the correct side.

                                                                                                                                                      Ophthalmic
                                                 Tests as indicated from H&P

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                    Laboratory

                    Premedication                Standard premedication (see p. B-1).

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                    Anesthetic technique        GETA

                    Induction                   Standard induction (see p. B-2). An oral RAE ETT may be preferred.

                    Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (see, p. B-3). Muscle relaxation is not required.

                    Emergence                   No special considerations. The common occurrence of PONV requires the administra-
                                                tion of intraop antiemetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg iv, and ondansetron 4 mg iv).

                    Blood and fluid             Blood loss variable
                      requirements
                                                IV: 18-20 ga 31
                                                NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1).

                    Positioning                 Table rotated 908
                                                3 and pad pressure points
                                                3 nonoperated eye

                    Complications               Oculocardiac reflex (OCR)                 OCR: tractions on EOM’s → ↓↓ HR, ↓↓ BP,
                                                                                          ventricular ectopy, asystole. Rarely occurs
                                                                                          during GA or following adequate retrobulbar
                                                                                          block. Rx: stop surgical manipulation, atro-
                                                                                          pine for persistent bradycardia, OPR.
                                                Brainstem anesthesia                      Onset < 20 min → ↓ HR, ↓ BP, apnea, agitation,
                                                                                          asystole. Rx may require CPR, intubation and
                                                                                          prolonged ventilation.

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications               PONV                                    Rx: Metoclopramide 10 mg iv, and/or ondanse-
                                                                                        tron 4 mg iv

                    Pain management             Acetaminophen                           Occasionally parenteral opiates (see p. C-2).

                   Retinal Surgery
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Retinal surgery is performed for a wide variety of conditions (see Usual preop diagnoses, below). Most
                   retinal detachments are due to one or more small tears in the retina. Retinal detachments are classified as traction,
                   exudative (not usually treated with surgery), or rhegmatogenous (rupture, tear). Children, especially those with ROP

===== PAGE 172 =====
172        s e c t i o n 2.0   Ophthalmic Surgery
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                       Figure 2-12. Eye anatomy. (Reproduced with permission from Langston D, ed:
                                       Manual of Ocular Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd edition. Little, Brown, Boston: 1985.)

                             or trauma, may develop retinal detachments. In adults, retinal detachments are most frequently associated with
                             diabetes, myopia, trauma, and previous cataract surgery. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments (more common in
                             adults) start off with a small retinal tear, which allows the vitreous to seep in between the retina and pigment epithe-
                             lium, forcing retinal separation. Sx range from floaters and flashing lights to showers of black specks and, ultimately,
                             to a dark shadow that impinges on the field of vision. Retinal detachments may be complicated by proliferative
                             vitreoretinopathy (PVR), in which scar tissue grows along the surface of the retina, rendering it stiff and difficult
                             to reattach. Less commonly, retinal detachments are induced by other forms of vitreoretinal traction, or by trauma
                             involving an open globe. Care must be taken to avoid any increase in intraocular pressure (IOP) in an eye that may
                             be ruptured. On rare occasion, retinal detachments are due to the formation of a giant retinal tear. Just as rarely,
                             retinal surgery may be done on premature infants in an effort to prevent or repair retinal detachments. The ultimate
                             aim of retinal surgery is the preservation or recovery of vision through the restoration of normal posterior segment
                             anatomy. (Anatomy of the eye is shown in Fig. 2-12.)
                             Retinal surgery may involve various procedures alone or in combination, including scleral buckling, vitrectomy,
                             gas–fluid exchange, and injection of vitreous substitutes. Scleral buckles are silicone rubber appliances sutured to
                             the sclera to indent the eye wall, thereby relieving vitreous traction and functionally closing retinal tears. This is an
                             external procedure in which the eye may either not be entered at all or entered with a small needle puncture through
                             the sclera for drainage of subretinal fluid, or injection of gas.
                             Cryotherapy or lasers are used frequently to establish chorioretinal adhesions around retinal tears. Cryotherapy is
                             applied to the sclera; a laser is applied with a fiberoptic cable introduced into the vitreous cavity during vitrectomy
                             surgery, often in combination with a wide-field viewing system. It also can be administered with an indirect ophthal-
                             moscope delivery system for those eyes not undergoing vitrectomy.

===== PAGE 173 =====
Retinal Surgery     173

                   Simple detachments frequently can be repaired by a pneumatic retinopexy, in which retinal tears are treated with
                   cryotherapy and/or laser, and an expanding gas is injected into the vitreous cavity. This technique usually is done in
                   phakic eyes (eyes with intact lens) with tears between the 9 o’clock and 4 o’clock positions. Pneumatic retinopexy
                   usually is done as an outpatient office procedure, with local anesthesia, or, less commonly, MAC. The other proce-
                   dures discussed usually are done with MAC, although GA may be used, according to surgeon’s preference and the
                   patient’s systemic condition. Some surgeons inject retrobulbar or subconjunctival bupivacaine at the end of a proce-
                   dure done under GA to decrease postop pain.

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                   Vitrectomy (removal of vitreous) is commonly performed to reduce traction on the retina (↓ retinal detachment),
                   clear blood and debris, and remove scar tissue. It is an intraocular procedure in which three 20–25-ga openings are
                   made into the vitreous cavity with a myringotomy blade 3–4 mm posterior to the limbus (junction of the cornea
                   and sclera.) One of these openings in the inferotemporal quadrant is used for infusion of balanced salt solution
                   via a sutured or transconjunctival trochar-based cannula. The remaining openings are at the 9:30 and 2:30 o’clock
                   positions. One is used for a handheld fiberoptic light, the other for insertion of a variety of manual and automated
                   instruments, including suction cutters, scissors, and forceps, used to remove and section abnormal tissue within the
                   vitreous cavity.
                   Visualization of the retina during vitrectomy is made possible by a contact lens, which is either sutured to the eye or
                   held in position by an assistant. Some of these lenses provide a wide-field, inverted view of the retina, necessitating
                   an image inverter on the microscope. Alternatively, a noncontact, wide-field lens may be positioned just above the
                   cornea, suspended from the microscope. Balanced salt solution gas, silicone oil, or liquid perflurocarbon replaces the
                   vitreous and other tissues removed during the operation. A bubble of gas (e.g., sulfur hexafluoride or perfluoropro-
                   pane mixed with air) is sometimes introduced into the vitreous cavity during a scleral buckle or a vitrectomy when
                   the surgeon wants an internal tamponade of retinal tears that cannot be closed adequately by a scleral buckle alone.
                   N2O must be discontinued before a gas–fluid exchange to avoid an intraop or postop change in gas bubble size, pos-
                   sibly accompanied by abnormal IOP.
                   In the case of a giant retinal tear, a gas–fluid exchange formerly was performed with the patient in the prone posi-
                   tion toward the end of the operation. This required that the patient be on a Stryker frame, so that he or she could be
                   moved from the supine to the prone position for the gas-fluid exchange. Perfluorocarbon liquids now obviate the
                   need for a Stryker frame.
                   Liquid vitreous substitutes, such as perfluorocarbon liquids or silicone oil, are sometimes introduced into the vitre-
                   ous cavity during a vitrectomy. Perfluorocarbon liquids are heavier than water and are used as an intraoperative tool
                   to unfold the detached retina; they are removed at the end of the procedure. Perfluorocarbon liquids make possible
                   repair of giant retinal tears in the supine position, thus eliminating the need for a Stryker frame. They also facilitate
                   reattaching the retina when PVR is present, by allowing a relaxing retinotomy for those situations where the retina is
                   too stiff and foreshortened to be reattached by less-invasive measures. Silicone oil is used for complex detachments
                   in which a long-term, internal tamponade of retinal tears is deemed necessary to prevent redetachment. It usually is
                   removed a few months postoperatively with a second operation.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Simple and complex retinal detachment; diabetic retinopathy; vitreous hemorrhage or
                   opacification; macular epiretinal membranes; other surgically correctable macular conditions, such as macular holes
                   or macular degeneration with subfoveal choroidal neovascularization or hemorrhage; dislocated intraocular lenses;
                   endophthalmitis; macular degeneration with posterior segment trauma, including repair of ruptured globes and
                   removal of intraocular foreign bodies; retinopathy of prematurity (ROP); high myopia; trauma.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Transconjunctival

                     Special                 Vitrectomy machine; cryoprobe; laser; indirect ophthalmoscope; microscope
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Ruptured globe—avoid ↑ IOP. Stop N2O 5–10 min before a gas-fluid exchange. Retinal detach-
                       considerations        ments often require urgent surgery (< 24 h).

===== PAGE 174 =====
174        s e c t i o n 2.0    Ophthalmic Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Antibiotics             May use iv antibiotics at the start of surgery, in addition to subconjunctival antibiotics at conclu-
                                                       sion of surgery.

                               Surgical time           Pneumatic retinopexy: 20 min
                                                       Scleral buckle: 30 min to 2 h
                                                       Vitrectomy: 1–41 h
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                               Closing                 Try to avoid postop coughing, bucking, vomiting or other Valsalva-like events.
                                 considerations        Specific head positioning may be required following intraocular gas injection.

                               EBL                     None

                               Postop care             Prone positioning may be necessary if gas was injected

                               Mortality               Extremely rare

                               Morbidity               Hemorrhage: , 5%
                                                       Retinal detachment: , 5%
                                                       Infection: , 1%
                                                       Proliferative retinopathy

                               Pain score              4–6

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               Usually adults; occasionally premature infants (ROP) and children (retinal detachment or
                                                       trauma)

                               Male:Female             3:2

                               Incidence               1/10,000/yr phakic; 1–3% of patients postcataract extraction with placement of intraocular
                                                       lens

                               Etiology                Majority idiopathic possibly related to anatomic predisposition; some related to systemic disease
                                                       or induced by trauma or cataract surgery

                               Associated              Idiopathic: retinal detachment, epiretinal membrane, macular hole
                                 conditions            Diabetic retinopathy: vitreous hemorrhage or traction retinal detachment
                                                       Macular degeneration: subfoveal choroidal neovascularization or hemorrhage
                                                       Trauma: vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, ruptured globe
                                                       Intraocular foreign body (IOFB)
                                                       HTN: vitreous hemorrhage
                                                       Extreme prematurity: ROP
                                                       Proliferative sickle-cell retinopathy

                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             In MAC cases, the need for anxiolytics can often be reduced or eliminated by discussing in detail what will hap-
                             pen to the patient during the procedure and by addressing patient concerns (e.g., claustrophobia, positional pain,
                             supine dyspnea). Most vitreous and retinal procedures can be accomplished using regional anesthetic techniques
                              (retrobulbar, peribulbar, or sub-Tenon’s block with MAC. Procedures requiring more than 2 h and patients (or sur-
                               geons) with special needs (e.g., claustrophobia, uncooperative, immature) may benefit from GA. With MAC, the
                               anesthesiologist’s goal should be a comfortable, cooperative patient who can lie completely still without falling asleep
                               (thereby avoiding uncontrolled movement when suddenly awakened) for 1–2 h, while avoiding Valsalva-like events
                               (e.g., coughing).

===== PAGE 175 =====
Retinal Surgery      175

                    Cardiovascular          Mannitol decreases IOP by increasing plasma oncotic pressure relative to aqueous humor
                                            pressure. It may be given just before or during surgery. Total dosage should not exceed
                                            1.5–2 g/kg iv over a 30–60 min period. Rapid infusion of large doses of mannitol may
                                            precipitate ↓ BP, CHF, pulmonary edema, electrolyte abnormalities, and, possibly, myo-
                                            cardial ischemia; hence, the importance of a thorough evaluation of the patient’s renal and
                                            cardiovascular status prior to administering mannitol. Patients on antithrombotic drugs
                                            may be at higher risk for bleeding complications. The decision to stop these drugs and

                                                                                                                                                       Ophthalmic
                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                                            institute heparin bridge therapy should be made in consultation with both the surgeon and
                                            the prescribing physician.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Diabetes                Diabetic patients are at increased risk for silent myocardial ischemia. Pulmonary aspiration
                                            28 diabetic gastroparesis is also a risk in this population. Patients usually take 1/2 or 1/3 of
                                            their normal long-acting insulin dose (on the morning of surgery); fasting blood sugar is
                                            checked; and an iv infusion of D5 LR is started if glucose , 90 mg/dL or treated with regu-
                                            lar insulin if glucose . 200 mg/dL. Blood sugar is checked intraop and postop.

                    Renal                   Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, decreases secretion of aqueous humor. It
                                            also inhibits renal carbonic anhydrase, thereby causing loss of HCO3, Na1, K1, and water.
                                            Thus, patients on chronic therapy may be acidotic, hypokalemic, and hyponatremic.
                                            Tests: Electrolytes; others as indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic             Sickle-cell disease → retinopathy. Sickle-cell trait is not commonly associated with periop
                                            complications. Patients with sickle-cell anemia should be well hydrated and transfused
                                            preop, as necessary to increase HbA concentration . 40%.

                    Laboratory              Tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Midazolam 0.5 mg/kg po for pediatric patients (,30 min to peak effect; ,30 min duration
                                            of effect) and midazolam 1–2 mg iv incrementally for adults, will help alleviate anxiety.
                                            Avoid excessive sedation (respiratory depression) in sickle-cell patients. Surgeons prefer
                                            a normal IOP during retinal reattachment surgery, and therefore, patients may be given
                                            acetazolamide or mannitol to decrease IOP.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Retinal detachment surgery may be performed under regional anesthesia (e.g., retrobulbar
                   or peribulbar block); however, if the surgery is expected to be . 2 h, GETA may be preferable. If it is possible that
                   cautery may be used during the surgery, then the delivered FiO2 should be < 0.3 to minimize fire hazard when using
                   open oxygen delivery methods (e.g., nasal prongs, mask, etc.)

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2) is appropriate for these patients with care being taken not
                                            to put pressure on the affected eye with the face mask.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Ophthalmologists, however, may use expanding gases,
                                            such as sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) or perfluoropropane (C3F8), for internal tamponade of the
                                            retinal tears and, if N2O is used, the injected bubble may expand rapidly, causing a dramatic
                                            rise in IOP. This can impair retinal blood flow. N2O, if used at all, should be D/C’d at least
                                            15 min before gas injection. For any subsequent surgery, N2O should be avoided for at
                                            least 14 d after an air injection, 30 d after a SF6 injection, and 90 d after C3F8. Given the
                                            importance of patient immobility, nondepolarizing muscle relaxants may be advantageous,
                                            especially if N2O is D/C’d.

                    Emergence               Use narcotics for pain control and consider iv lidocaine 1.0–1.5 mg/kg 5 min prior to extu-
                                            bation to provide smooth emergence. The common occurrence of PONV requires the
                                            administration of intraop antiemetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10–20 mg iv and ondansetron
                                            4–8 mg iv 30 min before the end of surgery).

===== PAGE 176 =====
176        s e c t i o n 2.0     Ophthalmic Surgery

                              Blood and fluid             IV: 18–20 ga 31 (adult)
                                 requirements             20 ga 31 (child)
                                                          NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h

                              Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1)             Processed EEG may be useful in monitoring level
                                                                                                     of sedation
                                                                                                     Care should be taken to avoid CO2 accumulation
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                                                                                     under the drapes in MAC cases. A suction line can
                                                                                                     be used to improve air circulation under the drape

                              Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                  For long MAC cases, short “time-outs” should be
                                                                                                     taken to allow patients to reposition themselves
                                                          3 and pad nonsurgical eye

                              Complications               Oculocardiac reflex (OCR)                  OCR: traction on EOM’s → ↓↓ HR, ↓↓ BP, ven-
                                                                                                     tricular ectopy, asystole. Rarely occurs during GA
                                                                                                     or following adequate retrobulbar block. Rx: stop
                                                                                                     surgical manipulation, atropine for persistent
                                                                                                     bradycardia, CPR.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications                PONV                                       Rx: ondansetron 4–8 mg iv 6 metoclopramide
                                                           Corneal abrasion                           10–20 mg iv; however, eye pain (e.g., 28 to corneal
                                                           Vitreous hemorrhage                        abrasion) may also cause N/V. If this is the case,
                                                           Glaucoma                                   treat eye pain (ophthalmology consult).
                                                           Ptosis
                                                           Diplopia
                                                           Loss of vision                             Persistently low BP → retinal ischemia and central
                                                           Infection                                  retinal artery occlusion

                              Pain                         Retrobulbar anesthesia
                                management

                              Tests                        None routinely required

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Bryant JS, Busbee BG, Reichel E: Overview of ocular anesthesia: past and present. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2011; 22(3):180–4.
                                2. Charles S, Fanning GL: Anesthesia considerations for vitreoretinal surgery. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 2006; 19(2):239–43.
                                3. Kumar CM, Eld H, Dodds C: Sub-Tenon’s anaesthesia: complications and their prevention. Eye (Lond.) 2011; 25(6):694–703.
                                4. McGoldrick KE, Gayer SI: Anesthesia for Opthalmic Surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical Anesthesia,
                                   6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009:1375–92.
                                5. Nouvellon E, Cuvillon P, Ripart J: Regional anesthesia and eye surgery. Anesthesiology 2010; 113(5):1236–42.
                                6. Ryan SJ, Hinton DR, et al, eds: Retina, 5th edition. CV Mosby Co, St. Louis: 2012.

                             General Ophthalmic Surgery Suggested Readings
                                1. Ahmad S, Ahmad A: Complications of ophthalmologic nerve blocks: a review. J Clin Anesth 2003; 15(7):564–9.
                                2. Albert DM, Jakobiec FA, eds: Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2000;1463–76.
                                3. Kumar C, Dodds C, Gayer S: Ophthalmic Anaesthsia (Oxford Specialist Handbooks in Anesthesia). Oxford University Press,
                                   2012.
                                4. Levine MR, ed: Manual of Oculoplastic Surgery, 2nd edition. Butterworth-Heinmann, New York: 1996.
                                5. Nesi FA, Smith BC, eds: Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 2nd edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1997.
                                6. Pokhrel PK, Loftus SA: Ocular emergencies. Am Fam Physician 2007; 76(6):829–36.

                             Suggested Viewing
                             Links are available online to the following videos:
                             Scleral Buckle and Vitrectomy for Retinal Detachment: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJy8qjNojAc
                             Vitrectomy for Vitreous Opacities (Floaters): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FJYeEGl98g
                             Advanced Cataract Surgery – “In Simple English”: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aohAHNYpAOs

===== PAGE 177 =====
s e c t i o n

                     3.0 Otolaryngology—
                                      Head and Neck
                                      Surgery

                                      surgeons
                                      Michael J. Kaplan, MD (Head & Neck Surgery)
                                      Edward J. Damrose, MD (Laryngology)
                                      Nikolas H. Blevins, MD (Otology & Neurotology)
                                      Robert K. Jackler, MD (Otology & Neurotology)
                                      Peter H. Hwang, MD (Endoscopic Sinus Surgery)
                                      Sarmela T. Sunder, MD (Endoscopic Sinus Surgery)
                                      Sam P. Most, MD (Nasal Surgery)
                                      Willard E. Fee, Jr. MD (Head & Neck Surgery)
                                      Robert W. Riley, DDS, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Nelson B. Powell, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Donald M. Sesso, DO (Sleep-disordered breathing)

                                      anesthesiologists
                                      Vladimir Nekhendzy, MD (All topics)
                                      Brett L. Miller (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Michael W. Champeau, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)

