# 3_OTOLARYNGOLOGY
# Source: 3 OTOLARYNGOLOGY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 3.0 Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
# Pages: 178-267
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy (p. 181)
- Tracheotomy/Tracheostomy And Cricothyroidotomy (p. 190)
- Zenker’S Diverticulectomy (Open Approach) (p. 195)
- Arytenoid Adduction, Injection Laryngoplasty) (p. 197)
- Tracheal And Cricotracheal Resection (p. 200)
- Laryngectomy: Partial And Total (p. 203)
- Tonsillectomy And/Or Adenoidectomy (p. 207)
- Glossectomy (p. 212)
- Maxillectomy And Orbit Exenteration (p. 214)
- Lymph Node Biopsy (p. 223)
- Parotidectomy: Superficial, Total, Or Radical (p. 224)
- Submandibular Gland Excision (p. 226)
- Endoscopic Sinus Surgery Peter H. Hwang And Sarmela T. Sunder (p. 229)
- External Sinus Surgery (p. 235)
- Septorhinoplasty) Sam P. Most (p. 237)
- Head And Neck Surgery (p. 238)
- Otology And Neurotology (p. 244)
- Otolaryngology— (p. 249)
- Sleep-Disordered Breathing (p. 258)

===== PAGE ? =====
176        s e c t i o n 2.0     Ophthalmic Surgery

                              Blood and fluid             IV: 18–20 ga 31 (adult)
                                 requirements             20 ga 31 (child)
                                                          NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h

                              Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1)             Processed EEG may be useful in monitoring level
                                                                                                     of sedation
                                                                                                     Care should be taken to avoid CO2 accumulation
     Ophthalmic
      Surgery

                                                                                                     under the drapes in MAC cases. A suction line can
                                                                                                     be used to improve air circulation under the drape

                              Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                  For long MAC cases, short “time-outs” should be
                                                                                                     taken to allow patients to reposition themselves
                                                          3 and pad nonsurgical eye

                              Complications               Oculocardiac reflex (OCR)                  OCR: traction on EOM’s → ↓↓ HR, ↓↓ BP, ven-
                                                                                                     tricular ectopy, asystole. Rarely occurs during GA
                                                                                                     or following adequate retrobulbar block. Rx: stop
                                                                                                     surgical manipulation, atropine for persistent
                                                                                                     bradycardia, CPR.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications                PONV                                       Rx: ondansetron 4–8 mg iv 6 metoclopramide
                                                           Corneal abrasion                           10–20 mg iv; however, eye pain (e.g., 28 to corneal
                                                           Vitreous hemorrhage                        abrasion) may also cause N/V. If this is the case,
                                                           Glaucoma                                   treat eye pain (ophthalmology consult).
                                                           Ptosis
                                                           Diplopia
                                                           Loss of vision                             Persistently low BP → retinal ischemia and central
                                                           Infection                                  retinal artery occlusion

                              Pain                         Retrobulbar anesthesia
                                management

                              Tests                        None routinely required

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Bryant JS, Busbee BG, Reichel E: Overview of ocular anesthesia: past and present. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2011; 22(3):180–4.
                                2. Charles S, Fanning GL: Anesthesia considerations for vitreoretinal surgery. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 2006; 19(2):239–43.
                                3. Kumar CM, Eld H, Dodds C: Sub-Tenon’s anaesthesia: complications and their prevention. Eye (Lond.) 2011; 25(6):694–703.
                                4. McGoldrick KE, Gayer SI: Anesthesia for Opthalmic Surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical Anesthesia,
                                   6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009:1375–92.
                                5. Nouvellon E, Cuvillon P, Ripart J: Regional anesthesia and eye surgery. Anesthesiology 2010; 113(5):1236–42.
                                6. Ryan SJ, Hinton DR, et al, eds: Retina, 5th edition. CV Mosby Co, St. Louis: 2012.

                             General Ophthalmic Surgery Suggested Readings
                                1. Ahmad S, Ahmad A: Complications of ophthalmologic nerve blocks: a review. J Clin Anesth 2003; 15(7):564–9.
                                2. Albert DM, Jakobiec FA, eds: Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2000;1463–76.
                                3. Kumar C, Dodds C, Gayer S: Ophthalmic Anaesthsia (Oxford Specialist Handbooks in Anesthesia). Oxford University Press,
                                   2012.
                                4. Levine MR, ed: Manual of Oculoplastic Surgery, 2nd edition. Butterworth-Heinmann, New York: 1996.
                                5. Nesi FA, Smith BC, eds: Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 2nd edition. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1997.
                                6. Pokhrel PK, Loftus SA: Ocular emergencies. Am Fam Physician 2007; 76(6):829–36.

                             Suggested Viewing
                             Links are available online to the following videos:
                             Scleral Buckle and Vitrectomy for Retinal Detachment: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJy8qjNojAc
                             Vitrectomy for Vitreous Opacities (Floaters): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FJYeEGl98g
                             Advanced Cataract Surgery – “In Simple English”: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aohAHNYpAOs

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                     3.0 Otolaryngology—
                                      Head and Neck
                                      Surgery

                                      surgeons
                                      Michael J. Kaplan, MD (Head & Neck Surgery)
                                      Edward J. Damrose, MD (Laryngology)
                                      Nikolas H. Blevins, MD (Otology & Neurotology)
                                      Robert K. Jackler, MD (Otology & Neurotology)
                                      Peter H. Hwang, MD (Endoscopic Sinus Surgery)
                                      Sarmela T. Sunder, MD (Endoscopic Sinus Surgery)
                                      Sam P. Most, MD (Nasal Surgery)
                                      Willard E. Fee, Jr. MD (Head & Neck Surgery)
                                      Robert W. Riley, DDS, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Nelson B. Powell, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Donald M. Sesso, DO (Sleep-disordered breathing)

                                      anesthesiologists
                                      Vladimir Nekhendzy, MD (All topics)
                                      Brett L. Miller (Sleep-disordered breathing)
                                      Michael W. Champeau, MD (Sleep-disordered breathing)

===== PAGE 178 =====
Introduction—Surgeon’s perspective
                                Interdisciplinary cooperation is nowhere more critical than where the priority of airway maintenance is confronted
                                both with abnormalities in the airway and with adjacent surgical goals. An anesthesiologist versed both in the man-
                                agement of the difficult airway and an ability to accurately anticipate the issues confronting the surgeon is critical.
                                Similarly, a communicative surgeon fully aware of the problems the anesthesiologist is likely to encounter is critical
                                to minimizing complications. Important issues that require mutual understanding include:
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                      (a) Airway management: anesthesia induction, endotracheal tube size, head range of motion with shared air-
                                            way space, a well-secured ETT, postop airway edema, and smooth emergence from anesthesia
                                      (b) Muscle relaxation, patient immobility, patient positioning
                                      (c) Deliberate relative hypotensive anesthesia and management of bradycardia
                                      (d) Antiemetics and pain management postop
                                      (e) Patient population considerations: frequent cardiac and pulmonary issues associated with older patients,
                                           especially with alcohol and tobacco use; degenerative c-spine issues; and prior irradiation affecting neck mobility.
                                Airway management: An initially compromised airway is not uncommon in many otolaryngology head and neck
                                procedures. Many others may develop airway loss at induction or if premature extubation occurs. Communication
                                between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is essential, as is a discussion of a plan and backup plan should an emer-
                                gency arise. Availability of a sliding Jackson scope and tracheotomy equipment, as well as plans for fiberoptic intuba-
                                tion, awake intubation, or retrograde intubation, should be discussed as indicated.
                                For procedures within the airway, an endotracheal tube no larger than 6 mm should be adequate and will reduce postop
                                airway edema. An armored tube is helpful when the surgical procedure is intraoral and the tube may be compressed. A
                                nasotracheal intubation should be discussed as an alternative in this situation. If laser surgery is planned, maintaining the
                                FiO2 at < 0.3 is indicated. If fiberoptic bronchoscopy is planned, then a 7.0- or 7.5-mm ETT will facilitate passage of the
                                bronchoscope through the ETT, after which for a longer case, changing to a smaller tube may be warranted.
                                As the patient is generally turned 90° or 180° away from the anesthesiologist, a very secure airway is important.
                                If the surgeon needs access in the mouth, securing the tube via a wire to several teeth may work better than tape.
                                Muscle relaxation and patient positioning: Avoidance of muscle relaxation is important if a motor nerve, such as
                                the facial nerve, is to be dissected. Muscle relaxation is important, on the other hand, in esophagoscopy and tongue sur-
                                gery. Communicate and coordinate timing of drug administration. Frequently the surgeon will need to turn the patient’s
                                head during surgery. Anticipating this movement when initially securing the endotracheal tube and its connections will
                                prevent disconnection. In neck surgery, the neck is often rotated away from the surgeon; overrotation presents the risk
                                of brachial plexus stretch injuries. If a radial free flap is anticipated, then positioning of the arm as well as rotation of the
                                head should be carefully coordinated to avoid injury while still providing needed access and a secure airway.
                                Deliberate relative hypotensive anesthesia, to a SBP of <100 mmHg, depending on individual patient’s needs, is
                                often a boon to the surgeon operating in the highly vascular fields of the head and neck, or operating with a micro-
                                scope. For selected cases the patient also will have had preop embolization of a tumor and its blood supply (e.g., an-
                                giofibromas and skull base paragangliomas). Bradycardia may occur if the surgeon operates near the vagus nerve or
                                carotid bifurcation. If this occurs, it is usually sufficient for the anesthesiologist to communicate this and the surgeon
                                can desist for a period of time. Occasionally topical or locally injected anesthetics will be necessary.

                                INTRODUCTION—ANESTHESIOLOGIST’S PERSPECTIVE
                                    PATIENT POPULATION
                                Many ENT patients are smokers and elderly, and have ↑incidence of CAD, HTN, chronic renal insufficiency, and COPD.
                                Careful H&P must be performed to ensure that the patient’s functional status is optimized. Chronic cigarette smoking and
                                alcohol use also cause an induction of cytochrome P450 multi-enzyme system → ↑ opioids and ↑ NMB requirements.

                          178

===== PAGE 179 =====
Anesthetic Management          179

                    Table 3-1. Predictors of Difficult Face Mask Ventilation
                    Age > 57 y.o.
                    Body Mass Index ≥ 30 kg/m2
                    Beard
                    Snoring or OSA
                    Lack of teeth
                    Mallampati III or IV

                                                                                                                                                               Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                 Otolaryngology—
                    Limited mandibular protrusion

                    Table 3-2. Predictors of Impossible Mask Ventilation
                    Male
                    Beard
                    Obstructive sleep apnea (moderate to severe, requiring PAP treatment)
                    Mallampati III or IV
                    H/o neck radiation

                           AIRWAY
                   ENT patients often present with H&P findings associated with a difficult airway including: (1) anatomic characteris-
                   tics (e.g., ↓ C-spine ROM, large tongue, receding jaw, etc.); (2) Hx of stridor and hoarseness (airway narrowing and
                   possible vocal cord (VC) dysfunction); (3) previous Hx of neck surgery, trauma, or XRT (↓ compliance of the tissues,
                   ↓ neck ROM, ↓ mouth opening); (4) previous Hx of difficult intubation, and (5) infections (e.g., epiglottitis, retropha-
                   ryngeal abscess, Ludwig’s angina).
                   Meticulous examination of the airway must be performed, and there should be a low threshold for an awake intubation if
                   the airway is questionable. The awake vs. asleep approach to tracheal intubation should be guided by the presence of pre-
                   dictors of difficult or impossible mask ventilation, and their association with difficult intubation (DI) (Tables 3-1 and 3-2).
                   If intubation difficulty is anticipated, but a conventional DL after induction of GA is nevertheless chosen, at least two
                   clearly defined backup airway management plans should be in place. Video laryngoscopy (e.g., Glidescope) will often
                   improve airway visualization, and the LMA-Fastrach™ provides rescue ventilation with a 95–100% success rate in dif-
                   ficult airway situations. If a conventional DL was chosen as a first approach, the patient’s head positioning should be
                   optimized and simple intubating aids (e.g., stylets, gum elastic bougie) as well as the ETTs of different sizes made readily
                   available. The number of DL intubation attempts should be limited to two; repeated intubating attempts are associated
                   with increased incidence of airway trauma, unanticipated ICU admission and “cannot ventilate-cannot intubate” events.
                   For most ENT surgical procedures the patient’s airway is shared with the surgeon, and immediate access to the air-
                   way may be difficult or impossible. The ETT must be secured diligently to prevent an accidental extubation or pullout
                   of the ETT to the subglottic area, which may result in exerting direct pressure on the recurrent laryngeal nerves by
                   the ETT cuff. For certain procedures (e.g., excision of tumors of the base of the tongue) nasal intubation may be
                   required to facilitate surgical access, and the surgeon should be consulted before induction.

                   ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT
                   Some of the essential anesthesia management requirements for ENT surgery include: (1) assurance of good intraop
                   and postop analgesia (most of the procedures are performed on highly reflexogenic areas); (2) quiet surgical field (the
                   operated areas are highly vascular). Moderate controlled hypotension is widely employed: ↓SBP <100 mm Hg, MAP =
                   60–70 mm Hg, unless contraindicated; (3) immobility (for certain procedures profound muscle relaxation may be
                   required, while for others administration of NMB must be avoided); (4) smooth emergence from anesthesia. The lat-
                   ter constitutes one of the most challenging tasks, as every attempt should be made to avoid or minimize the patient’s

===== PAGE 180 =====
180   s e c t i o n 3.0       Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                reaction to the ETT during tracheal extubation. Straining, bucking, or coughing may provoke early postop bleeding
                                (↑ venous and arterial pressure), disrupt delicate suture lines (e.g., facial nerve repair), dislodge surgical grafts (e.g.,
                                tympanoplasty), or cause additional trauma to the vocal cords after VC surgery. Many ENT surgeons have their own
                                “list” of the procedures where the patient’s reaction to the ETT should be completely avoided during extubation, and
                                an anesthesiologist should be familiar with the surgeon’s preferences.
                                Opioid-based anesthetic techniques are especially advantageous and result in significant ↓ MAC while providing suf-
                                ficient blunting of the tracheal responses to the in-situ ETT. In an opioid-naive patient, the choice of an opioid analgesic
                                depends primarily on several factors: anticipated surgical stimulation and postop pain, duration of surgery, coexisting
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                medical conditions. High dose opioids (fentanyl: loading dose 3–10 mcg/kg iv, sufentanil: loading dose 0.5–1.5 mcg/kg iv),
    Otolaryngology—

                                followed by either intermittent boluses or continuous infusion are the author’s preferred choice for major ENT surgery. For
                                procedures that may be highly stimulating, but associated with minimal postop discomfort (e.g., laser surgery of the air-
                                way), shorter-acting opioids are preferred: remifentanil (loading dose 0.5–1.0 mcg/kg iv, infusion 0.1–0.3 mcg/kg/min iv).
                                TIVA is commonly employed, especially for endoscopic procedures. Most studies demonstrate that, compared to
                                inhalational and balanced inhalational techniques, TIVA offers improved hemodynamic stability, quicker recovery
                                times, decreased incidence of PONV, and improved patient satisfaction.
                                Maintenance of moderate controlled hypotension (MAP, 60–70 mmHg) is useful for maintaining optimal operating
                                conditions. A variety of pharmacological approaches have been successfully employed for this purpose. The use of
                                remifentanil is particularly effective in that regard, and is equally useful with both inhalational and TIVA techniques.
                                The use of esmolol 0.5–1 mg/kg iv bolus, followed by continuous iv infusion 100–300 mcg/kg/min represents an-
                                other attractive therapeutic option.
                                GETA is most widely employed. Use of a laryngeal mask airway (LMA) for ENT surgery, when feasible, is beneficial
                                (↓ coughing, ↓ laryngospasm; see Table 3-3). Furthermore, the use of an LMA does not require NMB and facilitates
                                the resumption of spontaneous ventilation. When used appropriately in selected patients, absence of immediate ac-
                                cess to the patient’s airway is not a deviation from the standard of care.
                                A flexible laryngeal mask airway (FLMA), but not an LMA Classic™, LMA ProSeal™, or LMA Supreme™, is most
                                frequently used in ENT anesthesia, because its shaft can be bent away from the surgical field without causing cuff
                                displacement. Close communication between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is essential, as even a properly placed
                                FLMA can become dislodged during surgical manipulations. The LMA-Proseal/Supreme is preferred whenever cen-
                                tral positioning of the LMA can be safely maintained, (e.g., otologic surgery). Proper LMA insertion technique is
                                crucial for minimizing the risk of aspiration or gastric insufflation especially if positive pressure ventilation (PPV) is
                                planned. To minimize leaks, the largest size (FLMA #5) should be used for PPV whenever possible. Gastric insuffla-
                                tion is further minimized by ↓ Vt to 6–10 mL/kg and by keeping PIP < 20 cm H2O. The absence of gastric insufflation
                                should be documented in the anesthesia record after auscultating the epigastric area.
                                Smooth emergence from anesthesia constitutes a particularly challenging task when GETA is used. Deeper stages
                                of anesthesia are usually required until the very end of the procedure to blunt patient’s laryngo-tracheal responses. A
                                low-dose remifentanil infusion to blunt the tracheal responses and promote smooth extubation may be helpful. The
                                EC95 effect site concentration of remifentanil for blunting tracheal reflexes after balanced desflurane and sevoflurane
                                anesthesia is in the range 2.3–2.9 ng/mL (corresponding manual infusion rate 0.08–1.0 mcg/kg/min).
                                Antiemetic prophylaxis should be routine and is most commonly achieved by iv administration of a 5-HT3 blocker.
                                Multimodal antiemetic prophylaxis should be employed for patients at high risk for PONV. The addition of metoclo-
                                promide (10–20 mg iv) may be beneficial for the patients who had undergone the procedures resulting in accumula-
                                tion of the passively swallowed blood in the stomach (e.g., nasal or intraoral surgery).

                                 Table 3-3. Advantages of the LMA Compared with the ETT
                                 Adverse Event                                               ETT %                         LMA %                     Ratio
                                 ETT:LMA
                                 Clinically significant problems                             3.4                           0.9                       3.8
                                 Laryngeal spasm                                             0.38                          0.12                      3.2
                                 Aspiration                                                  0.017                         0.02                      0.85
                                 Sore throat                                                 50                            10                        5
                                 Laryngeal trauma                                            6.2                           ? (< 1)                   >6
                                 Coughing on emergence                                       60                            2                         30
                                 (Modified from Brimacombe JR, Brain AJ: The Laryngeal Mask Airway. A Review and Practical Guide, Saunders: 1997.)

===== PAGE 181 =====
Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy                       181

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, et al: Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea and vomiting after ambulatory surgery?
                        Anesthesiology 2012; 117:475–86.
                     2. Beer GM, Goldscheider E, Weber A, et al: Prevention of acute hematoma after face-lifts. Aesthetic Plast Surg 2010; 34:502–7.
                     3. Bitar G, Mullis W, Jacobs W, et al: Safety and efficacy of office-based surgery with monitored anesthesia care/sedation in 4778
                        consecutive plastic surgery procedures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2003; 111:150–6.
                     4. Blake DR: Office-based anesthesia: dispelling common myths. Aesthet Surg J 2008; 28:564–70.
                     5. Caloss R, Lard MD: Anesthesia for office-based facial cosmetic surgery. Atlas Oral Maxillofacial Surg Clin N Am 2004; 12:163–77.
                     6. Chuang YC, Wang CH, Lin YS: Negative pressure pulmonary edema: report of three cases and review of the literature. Eur

                                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                        Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2007; 264:1113–6.

                                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                     7. Clevens RA: Avoiding patient dissatisfaction and complications in facelift surgery. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 2009; 17:515–30.
                     8. Friedberg BL: Propofol-ketamine technique: dissociative anesthesia for office surgery (a 5-year review of 1264 cases). Aesthetic
                        Plast Surg 1999; 23:70–5.
                     9. Hoefflin SM, Bornstein JB, Gordon M: General anesthesia in an office-based plastic surgical facility: a report on more than
                        23,000 consecutive office-based procedures under general anesthesia with no significant anesthetic complications. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2001; 107:243–51.
                    10. Kolodzie K, Apfel CC: Nausea and vomiting after office-based anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22:532–8.
                    11. Liu YH, Li MJ, Wang PC, et al: Use of dexamethasone on the prophylaxis of nausea and vomiting after tympanomastoid
                        surgery. Laryngoscope 2001; 111:1271–4.
                    12. Mamiya H, Ichinohe T, Kaneko Y: Negative pressure pulmonary edema after oral and maxillofacial surgery. Anesth Prog 2009;
                        56:49–52.
                    13. Niamtu J: Expanding hematoma in face-lift surgery: literature review, case presentations, and caveats. Dermatol Surg 2005;
                        31:1134–44.
                    14. Prendiville S, Weiser S: Management of anesthesia and facility in facelift surgery. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 2009; 17:531–8.
                    15. Steely RL, Collins DR Jr, Cohen BE, et al: Postoperative nausea and vomiting in the plastic surgery patient. Aesthetic Plast
                        Surg 2004; 28:29–32.
                    16. Taub PJ, Bashey S, Hausman LM: Anesthesia for cosmetic surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010; 125:1e–7e.
                    17. Westreich R, Sampson I, Shaari CM, et al: Negative-pressure pulmonary edema after routine septorhinoplasty: discussion of
                        pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention. Arch Facial Plast Surg 2006; 8:8–15.

                   LARYNGOSCOPY/BRONCHOSCOPY/ESOPHAGOSCOPY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Laryngoscopy is used for inspection of the pharynx, hypopharynx, or larynx for diagnostic and/or
                   therapeutic benefit. The patient is supine with cervical spine flexed and atlantoaxial joint extended (this position is
                   best achieved with a headrest); and the teeth are protected with a mouth guard. The laryngoscope is introduced
                   (Fig. 3-1); then, with a lifting motion, a thorough examination of the oropharynx, hypopharynx, laryngopharynx,
                   and larynx is carried out and biopsies can be taken. Any bleeding normally can be controlled easily with cotton pled-
                   gets soaked in epinephrine, packing, or endoscopic cautery. Laryngoscopy often is combined with esophagoscopy,

                               Figure 3-1. Placement of anterior commissure laryngoscope for laryngoscopy.

===== PAGE 182 =====
182   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                bronchoscopy, or direct nasopharyngoscopy to survey the aerodigestive tract for malignancy. If the procedure is
                                diagnostic, the surgeon may need to visualize the airway before intubation and/or muscle relaxation. If a laser is to
                                be utilized, a special laser ETT, < 30% FiO2, and avoidance of N2O are required.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Oropharyngeal, hypopharyngeal, or laryngeal tumors
                                Description: Operative microlaryngoscopy. A variety of laryngeal lesions, including papilloma, cysts, and polyps,
                                can be removed endoscopically. Because of their close apposition to the delicate tissues of the vocal fold, a high
                                degree of precision may be needed to remove the growth without damaging the underlying membrane. To this end,
                                specialized endoscopes, such as the Dedo operating laryngoscope, are deployed transorally to allow the surgeon a
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                binocular view of the vocal fold and the target lesion. They can be suspended from a Mayo stand to free both of the
    Otolaryngology—

                                surgeon’s hands for operating. Using the microscope, a variety of specialized endoscopic instruments and the CO2
                                laser, the surgeon may be afforded excellent visualization of and unobstructed access to the vocal folds for diagnostic
                                and therapeutic purposes. Operative microlaryngoscopy may necessitate several hours of work. Because of the preci-
                                sion involved in such procedures and the high degree of stimulation to the patient, general anesthesia (± jet ventila-
                                tion) with muscle relaxation is required. Intubation with a small-caliber microlaryngeal or laser-safe tube (5 or 6 mm)
                                may be required for these procedures. In cases where jet ventilation is to be performed, an endoscope suitable for
                                this technique should be available. Intermittent apneic ventilation is also a possibility, although this involves periodic
                                interruption of surgery, which can be cumbersome and distracting.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Vocal fold neoplasm; vocal fold paralysis
                                Description: Bronchoscopy is used for visualization of the tracheobronchial tree for both diagnostic and therapeu-
                                tic purposes. The patient is supine with head elevated and neck extended at the upper cervical level. The broncho-
                                scope is directed along the right side of the tongue forward toward the midline to visualize the epiglottis. Next, the
                                bronchoscope tip is used to lift the epiglottis and advance the bronchoscope through the vocal cords, into the trachea
                                and bronchus (Fig. 3-2). With the aid of telescopes, the bronchoscope can be directed for inspection of the carina,
                                main bronchi, and the segmental bronchi. Rigid bronchoscopes provide a large working channel through which to

                                          Figure 3-2. Rigid bronchoscopy showing adaptor (Racine) for anesthesia machine.
                                          Note neck flexion and head extension to align oropharyngeal and tracheal axes.

===== PAGE 183 =====
Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy                 183

                   introduce grasping and biopsy forceps. As such, rigid bronchoscopes may provide a more stable platform for removal
                   or retrieval of foreign bodies, tumors, and stents than flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopes.
                   Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy is more commonly performed than rigid bronchoscopy. The endoscope is usually
                   connected to a monitor, and suction, irrigation, and biopsy channels are self-integrated. Spontaneous ventilation can
                   be maintained, which can allow the procedure to be performed without an ETT in place, affording unobstructed
                   visualization of the entire upper airway. A bite block is usually placed to protect the endoscope from dental trauma
                   and to allow easier advancement through the oropharynx into the larynx.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma; foreign body (FB) in bronchus

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   Description: Esophagoscopy is used for visualization of the esophagus for either diagnostic or therapeutic ben-
                   efit. The patient is supine with head elevated and neck extended at the upper cervical level. The esophagoscope
                   (held in the dominant hand) is advanced through the mouth behind the arytenoids, gently using the thumb of the
                   nondominant hand. The bevel of the scope is then used to advance through the cricopharyngeal muscle (upper
                    esophageal sphincter) with an upward lifting movement, entering the cervical esophagus. As the scope advances,
                    the head may have to be lowered or the neck extended and the scope directed slightly toward the left. The scope
                    is advanced to the gastroesophageal junction with great care to ensure a visible lumen is seen at all times to avoid
                    inadvertent perforation. Flexible fiberoptic esophagoscopy is performed in an essentially identical manner. Supe-
                     rior visualization has made this the technique of choice for many surgeons. Biopsies may be taken and percutaneous
                     gastrostomy tubes may be placed using the fiberoptic esophagoscope.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma; FB ingestion
                   Description: Panendoscopy, or triple endoscopy, is the combination of laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and
                   esophagoscopy. It is usually performed as part of the evaluation of patients with newly diagnosed cancer of the
                   head and neck for several reasons: (a) to gauge the extent of the primary tumor and to evaluate resectability;
                   (b) to evaluate for the presence of synchronous tumors in other locations within the upper aerodigestive tract;
                   and (c) to identify the source of the primary lesion in patients who present with secondary cervical metastases.
                   In the 3rd case, after PET-CT, endoscopy is supplemented with directed biopsies from those locations most
                   likely to contain the occult primary lesion, including the nasopharynx, tonsillar fossae, and tongue base, with
                   tonsillectomy commonly performed as well. Identification of the source of the primary lesion allows for more
                   directed therapy, tailored irradiation fields, improved local control, and decreased morbidity.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                                                                      If Therapeutic Procedure
                                          Laryngoscopy            Bronchoscopy     Esophagoscopy      Added

                     Position             Supine                  ⇐                ⇐                  ⇐

                     Special              Endoscopes, video       ⇐                ⇐                  Laser, laser-safe ETT, gastroscope
                       instrumentation    monitors, suction                                           and G-tube (abdominal prep)

                     Unique               Dexamethasone 4–8       ⇐                ⇐                  ⇐ If laser ablation, keep O2
                       considerations     mg if airway edema                                          < 30%

                     Antibiotics          None                    None             None               cefazolin 1 g and metronidazole
                                                                                                      500 mg or clindamycin 600 mg

                     Surgical time        10–30 min               ⇐                ⇐                  30–120+ min

                     EBL                  Minimal                 ⇐                ⇐                  typically minimal

                     Postop care          PACU; rarely 23 h       ⇐                ⇐                  ⇐; depends on specific intervention,
                                          stay 2° airway issues                                       if G-tube: monitor for abdominal signs

                     Mortality            < 1%                    ⇐                ⇐                  ⇐

                     Morbidity            With MDL, incisor       ⇐                Perforation < 1%   ⇐ ; if G-tube placement, <2%
                                          trauma < 1%                                                 abdominal bleed or free air; if MDL
                                                                                                      with laser of laser bronchoscopy
                                                                                                      < 1% pneumothorax, < 5% airway
                                                                                                      compromise

===== PAGE 184 =====
184   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                        Laryngoscopy              Bronchoscopy     Esophagoscopy       If Therapeutic Procedure
                                                                                                                       Added

                                 Morbidity (cont’d)     Airway obstruction or     ⇐                ⇐
                                                        postprocedure edema
                                                        requiring reintubation:
                                                        < 1%
                                                        Laryngospasm: < 5%        ⇐                ⇐
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 Pain score             1–2                       1–2              1–2                 1–2

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                Newborn–90+                 ⇐                  ⇐                   ⇐

                                 Male:Female              1:1                         ⇐                  ⇐                   ⇐

                                 Incidence                Common                      ⇐                  ⇐                   ⇐

                                 Etiology                 Tumors, foreign bod-        ⇐                  ⇐                   ⇐ ; nutritional need (G-tube)
                                                          ies, congenital webs

                                 Association              Other congenital is-        ⇐                  ⇐                   ⇐
                                   Conditions             sues; if malignancy,
                                                          prior RT or chemo-
                                                          therapy and the
                                                          conditions associated
                                                          with that malignancy

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                (Procedures covered: bronchoscopy, esophagoscopy, panendoscopy, operative microlaryngoscopy, Zenker’s
                                diverticulectomy, laser surgery of the airway)

                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Many of these patients are elderly and have a history of smoking and alcohol abuse with corresponding implications
                                for intraop management. Patient fluid and nutritional status may be further compromised by preexisting malignancy.
                                Meticulous attention to airway management is paramount in these procedures, and close communication with the
                                surgeon is essential. Some patients presenting for esophagoscopy may have obstructing lesions of the esophagus or
                                Zenker’s diverticulum, active gastrointestinal bleeding, or require the removal of a foreign body, putting them at
                                increased risk of aspiration.

                                 Airway                    Although rare, the airway may be compromised in these patients at both the upper and
                                                           lower airway levels; thus a thorough preop airway assessment is essential. A clear backup
                                                           plan for securing the airway should be devised and discussed with the surgeon before in-
                                                           duction of GA. Stridor at rest suggests an airway narrowing ≤4.5 mm, although the airway
                                                           diameter can be seriously reduced even without stridor being present.
                                                           Patients with lesions in the mediastinum may have involvement of the recurrent laryn-
                                                           geal nerve, presenting with hoarseness and potential airway management problems (e.g.,
                                                           difficult mask ventilation, difficult intubation, ↑ aspiration risk). (See also Anesthetic Con-
                                                            siderations for Laryngectomy, p. 206)

===== PAGE 185 =====
Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy               185

                    Respiratory              These patients may have a high incidence of COPD and ↓respiratory reserve. The nature
                                             and characteristics of a productive cough must be noted. Wheezing on exam must be
                                             treated with bronchodilators before induction. Patients presenting with vocal cord (VC)
                                             paralysis or achalasia may have had the repeated episodes of pulmonary aspiration.
                                             Tests: CXR; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Dental                   Physical exam should include a careful dental assessment and documentation of any miss-
                                             ing, loose, or damaged teeth. Patients (or parents, as appropriate) should be informed that
                                             dental trauma may occur as a result of surgical instrumentation of the patient’s mouth

                                                                                                                                                       Head and Neck Surgery
                                             during the procedure.

                                                                                                                                                         Otolaryngology—
                    Cardiovascular           Adrenergic responses during endoscopy may be associated with up to a 4% incidence of
                                             myocardial ischemia. Careful preop Hx and thorough physical exam should be undertaken
                                             in patients with Hx of CAD and CHF, or those with cardiac risk factors (including age
                                             > 40 yr, male, HTN, hypercholesterolemia, long Hx of smoking, obesity, and family Hx).
                                             The volume status of debilitated patients who are unable to eat because of obstructing
                                             lesions of the esophagus should be assessed by measuring orthostatic BP changes.
                                             Tests: ECG; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Neurologic               Some patients may have Hx of ETOH abuse, which may result in ↑ anesthetic require-
                                             ments 2° hepatic enzyme induction. Symptoms of alcohol withdrawal (e.g., tremulousness,
                                             ↑ sympathetic activity, and altered mental status), if present, should be controlled before
                                             surgery.

                    Hematologic              Patients with malignancy or chronic disease may have evidence of anemia or coagulopathy.
                                             Tests: CBC; coagulation studies as indicated from H&P

                    Gastrointestinal         In some patients (e.g., with malignant tumors), significant electrolyte abnormalities may be
                                             present 2° malnutrition. Hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia should be corrected preop. In
                                             patients with Hx of ETOH abuse, liver disease and cirrhosis may be present.
                                             Tests: Electrolytes; BUN; Cr; LFT; coag studies, as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            An antisialogogue (e.g., glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg iv) may be desired by the surgeon to faciliate
                                             panendoscopy, especially in patients with copious secretions. Sedative premedication is
                                             routine, but should be minimized in the elderly and avoided in patients with symptoms of
                                             upper airway obstruction.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Airway management requires careful planning and continuous communication
                   with the surgeon. Surgical requirements include adequate muscle relaxation (movement, coughing, or bucking dur-
                   ing endoscopy may have disastrous consequences) and immobile vocal cords for vocal cord surgery. Cardiovascular
                   stability is important: laryngeal, tracheal, and carinal reflexes may provoke severe ↑ BP and ↑ HR, which can be det-
                   rimental in some patients. Adequate depth of anesthesia is essential, but the requirements for rapid awakening and
                   return of laryngeal reflexes present additional challenges in anesthetic management. Short-acting β-blockers (e.g.,
                   esmolol) may be indicated to treat breakthrough sympathetic responses, especially in patients with cardiac disease.
                   Remifentanil or alfentanil (see Introduction, p. 178) is useful for these procedures, which, although highly stimulat-
                   ing, are characterized by minimal or absent postop pain, and the majority of patients are discharged home from the
                   recovery room.
                   Special considerations: If flexible bronchoscopy is planned, the patient’s trachea is intubated in routine fashion
                   by the anesthesiologist with a large-diameter ETT (7.5–8.0 mm ID) to acommodate a flexible video bronchoscope.
                   The ETT is usually taped midline. As an alternative, in selected patients, flexible bronchoscopy can be performed
                   without tracheal intubation through the Patil-Syracuse mask during manual bag-mask ventilation. Placement and
                   manipulation of the flexible bronchoscope by the surgeon will be facilitated by the concomitant use of one of the
                   hollow oral airways used for the fiberoptic intubation (e.g., Williams airway). The patient can then be tracheally
                   intubated with a smaller diameter ETT (e.g., 6.0 mm ID), to facilitate surgical access.

===== PAGE 186 =====
186   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Flexible esophagoscopy is rarely performed as an isolated procedure but, if done, would also be facilitated by
                                tracheal placement of a small-diameter (e.g., 6.0 mm ID) ETT. The ETT is usually moved over to the left corner of
                                 the mouth and taped to the lower jaw, to provide more room for the esophagoscope advancement and manipulation.
                                If rigid bronchoscopy is planned first, GA is induced, and the patient is hyperventilated through the face mask with
                                FiO2 = 1.0. Following muscle relaxation, the surgeon may proceed, without securing an airway. Quick and gentle DL
                                for application of topical lidocaine to the larynx and upper trachea (LTA, 4% lidocaine 3–4 cc) before rigid bron-
                                choscopy may help blunt hemodynamic responses to the subsequent surgical manipulation. DL with LTA should
                                be avoided in patients with tumors at the base of the tongue (↑ risk of bleeding; see Anesthetic Considerations for
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                Glossectomy, p. 212) or when preexisting copious secretions or bleeding are present in the upper airway 2° ↑ risk of
    Otolaryngology—

                                pulmonary aspiration on emergence from anesthesia. It is advisable to demonstrate to the surgical team and docu-
                                ment in the chart absence of dental damage after DL has been performed.
                                After the rigid bronchoscope is introduced into the patient’s trachea, it is connected to an anesthesia circuit through a
                                flexible side port adapter (Racine, Fig. 3-1), and the patient is ventilated manually. High flows are usually required because
                                of the leak around the bronchoscope. Close communication with the surgeon is essential for adjusting ventilation when
                                the bronchoscope is introduced into the mainstem bronchus to avoid high inflating pressures and to ensure complete
                                exhalation (↓ risk of barotrauma). After rigid bronchoscopy is completed, mask ventilation with FiO2 = 1.0 before intuba-
                                tion is advisable to ensure adequate oxygenation and normocapnia. A reinforced ETT is useful for rigid esophagoscopy
                                to avoid possible compression of the ETT. The ETT should be moved to the left side of the patient’s mouth to facilitate in-
                                troduction of the surgical instruments and taped to the lower jaw because full opening of the patient’s mouth is required.
                                For operative microlaryngoscopy, a small-diameter (usually 5.0 mm ID), cuffed long microlaryngeal tube (MLT)
                                is most commonly used to facilitate visualization of the larynx, but will interfere with posterior glottis lesions, for
                                which jet ventilation (see below) is most commonly employed. The CO2 laser, which can precisely vaporize super-
                                ficial tissue, is widely used for vocal cord laser surgery, whereas the Nd:YAG (neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-
                                garnet) laser is usually employed for airway tumor debulking because of its ability to coagulate deeper lesions. The
                                Nd:YAG can be used through the suction channel of the fiber optic or video bronchoscope, whereas the CO2 laser
                                must be aimed directly at the targeted tissue. Both the CO2 and Nd:YAG wavelengths lie outside the visible spectrum,
                                and a separate, lower energy visible beam is used for aiming. The patient must be motionless, the patient’s eyes must
                                be protected with tape and moistened gauze, and OR personnel must wear protective goggles.
                                An intermittent apnea technique involves hyperventilation, followed by intermittent tracheal extubation for 1–5 min,
                                during which the laser is used. This approach is time consuming and may be associated with a higher incidence of
                                airway trauma and edema 2° repeated intubations. Careful pulse oximeter monitoring is essential for this technique.
                                Manual low-frequency jet ventilation (Fig. 3-3), or automated high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) may be
                                necessary when an ETT cannot be used (e.g., some supraglottic and subglottic lesions). For supraglottic manual jet
                                ventilation, the ventilating laryngoscope is most commonly employed. The axis of the jet should be in line with the
                                trachea, and full egress of air (complete chest deflation) should be ensured between the jet ventilator “puffs.” Close
                                communication with the surgeon is essential. The jet should be triggered during pauses between laser firings to keep
                                the vocal cords immobile. If jet ventilation is used for laser resection of papillomas, there is a risk of spreading the virus
                                to OR personnel, and special face masks should be worn in the OR. Jet ventilation generally provides adequate ventila-
                                tion without introducing flammable material into the airway or obstructing the surgical field. Its use, however, may
                                be associated with potentially severe complications, including barotrauma, pneumothorax and gastric distension (risk
                                of regurgitation), and is hindered by ↓ chest-wall into the airway or lung compliance. Full muscle relaxation is usually
                                required to facilitate precise laser firing. HFJV is most commonly delivered through a subglottic catheter or specialized
                                tube (e.g., Hunsaker tube).
                                For laser cases, precautions must be taken to prevent airway fire, including
                                    • Use special laser ETT (e.g., Mallinkrodt Laser-Flex, Xomed Laser Shield), although none of them provides
                                       100% protection from all types of lasers. Small (5.0 mm ID and smaller) diameter laser ETTs are preferred to
                                       facilitate surgical access.
                                    • Use the lowest possible FiO2 (≤ 0.3 strongly preferred), that will ensure adequate oxygenation (dilute O2 with
                                       air, N2, or helium) and avoid N2O (both O2 and N2O promote combustion).
                                    • Use colored (methylene blue-tinged) NS in the ETT cuff (will immediately alert the surgeon in case of a laser
                                       hit).
                                    • Place the ETT sufficiently deep into the trachea for the cuff to reduce the risk of laser contact.
                                Similar considerations apply in patients undergoing endoscopic Zenker’s diverticulectomy, when the CO2 laser is
                                used.

===== PAGE 187 =====
Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy               187

                                                                                                                                                       Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                         Otolaryngology—
                                                                                                                      gauge

                               Figure 3-3. Rigid endoscope with modified Sanders jet ventilation technique. The
                               oxygen supply at 50 psi is connected to a reducing valve that allows the pressure to be
                               adjusted from 0 to 50 psi. The side port of the endoscope is used as the Venturi injector
                               site, and the open end can be used for continuous viewing by the endoscopist.

                    Induction                Patients at risk for aspiration may require RSI with cricoid pressure (CP) if symptoms of
                                             active gastroesophageal reflux disease are present. Otherwise, anatomical location of the
                                             diverticulum (above the cricoid cartilage) makes application of CP largely ineffective. With
                                             the possible exception of endoscopic Zenker’s diverticulectomy, fentanyl use should be
                                             minimized (1–2 mcg/kg) or even completely avoided in favor of the short-acting opioids
                                             (remifentanil or alfentanil iv; see Introduction, p. 178), 2° minimal postop pain. Propofol
                                             (1–2 mg/kg) is the ideal induction agent. Patients with mobile, floppy, supraglottic tumors
                                             (e.g., papillomatosis, epiglottic cancer, large vocal cord polyps) are at ↑ risk for complete
                                             airway obstruction after induction of GA with or without neuromuscular blockade. Anes-
                                             thetic management of these patients requires careful planning and meticulous preparation
                                             (see Anesthetic Considerations for Laryngectomy, p. 206.) The surgeon should be consult-
                                             ed about the extent of the disease and the potential need for a tracheostomy. If the disease
                                             is severe, the surgeon should be present during induction for the possible need to perform
                                             urgent or emergent rigid bronchoscopy or cricothyrotomy/tracheostomy.

                    Maintenance              TIVA (e.g., propofol: 80–180 mcg/kg/min; remifentanil 0.1–0.25 mcg/kg/min) is widely
                                             used, especially when rigid bronchoscopy or jet ventilation/intermittent apnea techniques
                                             are planned. Compared to alfentanyl, the use of remifentanil during TIVA is associated
                                             with the increased hemodynamic stability, reduction in propofol dose and faster respira-
                                             tory recovery. When the ETT is used throughout the case, delivery of anesthetic gases
                                             may be used instead of a propofol infusion, especially if a bronchodilating effect is desir-
                                             able. Desflurane and sevoflurane are the preferred agents because of their low blood:gas
                                             solubility; sevoflurane may be favored in patients with preexisting cardiac disease to mini-
                                             mize the risk of a dose-dependent tachycardia. Breakthrough sympathetic responses can
                                             be managed safely by administration of β-blockers iv or small boluses of a short-acting
                                             opioid (see Introduction, p. 178). With intermittent apnea or jet ventilation techniques,
                                             it may be difficult to avoid hypercapnia and hypoxemia, which may provoke intraop
                                             dysrhythmias.
                                             Full muscle relaxation is routine: vocal cord immobility is essential for microlaryngeal and
                                             laser surgery. Monitoring the neuromuscular blockade may be more accurate at the facial

===== PAGE 188 =====
188   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Maintenance              nerve (orbicularis oculi muscle), than the ulnar nerve (adductor pollicis muscle) because
                                  (cont’d)               the recovery of the former better reflects the recovery of the laryngeal muscles. Care
                                                         should be taken to avoid inadvertent prolonged neuromuscular blockade by coordinating
                                                         administration of additional doses of muscle relaxants with the surgeon. As the surgery
                                                         approaches its end, deepening the level of anesthesia may be the preferred approach to
                                                         minimize VC movement. A succinylcholine infusion (2–6 mg/min iv) can be used safely
                                                         in selected patients (limiting the total dose of succinylcholine ≤ 4–6 mg/kg will help avoid
                                                         phase 2 block).
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                         Patient should have full return of protective airway reflexes prior to extubation. The
    Otolaryngology—

                                Emergence
                                                         patient’s stomach may need to be decompressed following jet ventilation. Smooth
                                                         emergence from anesthesia is obligatory to avoid additional trauma to the vocal cords.
                                                         For this reason, some surgeons request deep extubation after vocal cord surgery, which
                                                         presents extra challenges to the anesthesiologist (see Emergence for Tonsillectomy,
                                                         Adenoidectomy, p. 210).

                                Blood and fluid          IV: GI bleeder: 14–16 ga × 2           Blood loss is usually minimal; however, in patients
                                   requirements            Others: 20 ga × 1                    with ↑ risk of GI bleed, blood loss may be massive.
                                                         NS/LR @ 2–3 mL/kg/h                    T&C these patients for 2 U PRBC with blood
                                                                                                immediately available in OR.

                                Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1).            In patients with ↑ risk of GI bleed, an arterial line
                                                         ± arterial line                        is desirable.

                                Positioning              OR table rotated 90° or 180° away      A shoulder roll is placed and the patient’s neck is
                                                           from the anesthesiologist            extended to facilitate endoscopy.
                                                         3 and pad pressure points              Special attention should be paid to prevent com-
                                                         3 eyes                                 pression of the patient’s shoulder by the v ertical
                                                                                                bar of the Mayo stand, which is frequently
                                                                                                employed for suspending the operating laryngo-
                                                                                                 scope or endoscope.

                                Complications            Inadequate ventilation                 Hypoxia and hypercarbia may be difficult to avoid
                                                         Loss of airway                         with jet ventilation.

                                                         Perforation of airway                   Mechanical or laser perforation of the airway may
                                                         Dysrhythmias                            → bronchospasm or uncontrollable hemorrhage.
                                                         Pneumothorax                            Dx: ↑RR, ↓BP, ↑CVP, wheezing, ↓O2 saturation,
                                                                                                ↑PIP, SOB, chest pain, ↓breath sounds, ↓ECG
                                                                                                amplitude, dullness on percussion. Rx: chest tube
                                                                                                 or needle aspiration, FiO2 = 1.0, ventilation and
                                                                                                volume expansion.
                                                         Eye trauma                             Eye trauma from surgical instruments used during
                                                         Bleeding postbiopsy                    endoscopy may require ophthalmology consult.

                                Airway fire              Disconnect the inspiratory limb of     This is an acute, life-threatening emergency. NB:
                                   (steps taken            the anesthesia circuit.              turning ventilator off only may not be sufficient due
                                   simultaneously        Remove ETT                             to continued delivery of fresh gas to the patient’s
                                   by the                Extinguish fire with oral NS           lungs. Rigid or flexible bronchoscopy is required
                                   anesthesiologist      Remove all burning material            to 3 extent of damage, presence of ETT fragments,
                                   and surgeon)                                                 and airway edema. All inhaled gases should be
                                                                                                humidified. Patients are usually reintubated and
                                                                                                
                                                         Resume ventilation by face             monitored in the ICU.
                                                          mask with 100% O2 . Consider
                                                           reintubation.
                                                         Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy.      To assess lower airway damage and to remove ETT
                                                         Save ETT for later examination.        fragments.

===== PAGE 189 =====
Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy                    189

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Dental trauma                       Dental trauma may result from surgical manipulation of
                                               Bleeding                            the airway, and the anesthesiologist must check the teeth
                                               Eye trauma                          immediately after airway access is gained. If dental trauma
                                                                                   is detected, notify the surgeon to discuss management
                                                                                   options, both immediate and subsequent.
                                               Postop airway compromise            Has a higher incidence than in general surgery patient
                                                                                   population. Patients with T3 lesions and those with as-

                                                                                                                                                                  Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                   sociated laryngeal biopsy (↑ airway swelling) after pan-

                                                                                                                                                                    Otolaryngology—
                                                                                   endoscopy may be at high risk for reintubation in PACU.
                                                                                   Delayed upper airway edema after laser surgery has been
                                                                                   described, when the coagulation (Nd:YAG) laser is used.
                                               Esophageal perforation              Complaints of painful swallowing as well as fever, tachy-
                                                                                   cardia, neck/chest/back pains postop may suggest an eso-
                                                                                   phageal perforation.
                                               Pneumothorax                        Pneumothorax (see above), mediastinal air or hemothorax
                                               Pneumomediastinum                   from esophageal perforation may present as ↓ BP and car-
                                               Hemothorax                          diovascular collapse.
                                               Aspiration

                    Pain                       Short-acting opiod                  Fentanyl 25–50 mcg iv prn is usually sufficient.
                     management

                    Tests                      3 CXR                               For evidence of pneumothorax, hemothorax, mediastinal
                                                                                   air.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Abdelmalak B, Ryckman JV, AlHaddad S, et al: Respiratory arrest after successful neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet
                        laser treatment of subglottic tracheal stenosis. Anesth Analg 2002; 95:485–6.
                     2. Bacher A, Lang T, Weber J, et al: Respiratory efficacy of subglottic low-frequency, subglottic combined-frequency, and
                        supraglottic combined-frequency jet ventilation during microlaryngeal surgery. Anesth Analg 2000; 91:1506–12.
                     3. Braverman I, Sichel JY, Halimi P, et al: Complication of jet ventilation during microlaryngeal surgery. Ann Otol Rhinol
                        Laryngol 1994; 103:624–7.
                     4. Donati F, Meistelman C, Benoit P: Vecuronium neuromuscular blockade at the adductor muscles of the larynx and adductor
                        pollicis. Anesthesiology 1991; 74:833–7.
                     5. Gaumann DM, Tassonyi E, Fathi F, et al: Effects of topical laryngeal lidocaine on the sympathetic response to rigid
                        panendoscopy under general anesthesia. J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 1992; 54:49–53.
                     6. Hill RS, Koltai PJ, Parnes SM: Airway complications from laryngoscopy and panendoscopy. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1987;
                        96:691–4.
                     7. Jaquet Y, Monnier P, Van Melle G, et al: Complications of different ventilation strategies in endoscopic laryngeal surgery: a
                        10-year review. Anesthesiology 2006; 104:52–9.
                     8. McRae K: Anesthesia for airway surgery. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19:497–541.
                     9. Ozkose Z, Yalcin Cok O, Tuncer B, et al: Comparison of hemodynamics, recovery profile, and early postoperative pain control
                        and costs of remifentanil versus alfentanil-based total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). J Clin Anesth 2002; 14:161–8.

===== PAGE 190 =====
190   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                TRACHEOTOMY/TRACHEOSTOMY AND
                                CRICOTHYROIDOTOMY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: When an airway needs to be obtained right away and intubation is not an option, a cricothrotomy is
                                indicated. A vertical incision is made in the midline through the cricothyroid membrane, an initial influx of air is
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                facilitated if the patient is spontaneously breathing, and a small ETT placed. It is wise to convert this to a tracheos-
                                tomy as soon as it is convenient to do so as this reduces the subsequent incidence of subglottic stenosis and cricoid
                                chondritis.
                                A tracheotomy is generally done in a controlled setting, either under general anesthesia in an intubated patient or under
                                local anesthesia. Either a short transverse incision 1–2 cm inferior to the cricoid or a midline vertical incision begin-
                                ning at the same location may be used. Strap muscles are retracted laterally, the thyroid isthmus is divided if necessary,
                                and in adults an inferiorly based tracheal flap consisting of the 2nd or 3rd tracheal ring is made and secured to the skin
                                inferiorly. In small children, it is better to make only a vertical midline incision to minimize the incidence of stenosis;
                                left and right stay sutures are then placed to assist in reintubation in the event of accidental dislodgment of the trache-
                                otomy tube. The tracheotomy tube in all patients is secured to the skin with sutures. Trach ties supplement this securing
                                of the tube unless these circumferential ties would interfere with venous drainage of a flap used in the head and neck
                                reconstruction.
                                When prolonged use of a tracheotomy is anticipated and it is unlikely that mechanical ventilation will be needed,
                                there are specialized silicon tracheotomy tubes with minimal intraluminal plastic and may be associated with fewer
                                intraluminal potential complications.
                                Usual preoperative diagnosis: Indications for tracheostomy are numerous, but share the common theme of
                                securing a safe airway either in anticipation of postop airway edema, inability to protect the airway from aspiration,
                                or as an urgent need to obtain an upper airway in pending obstruction. The fastest way to obtain an airway in an
                                outright emergency when intubation is not an option is a cricothyrostomy. Another 3rd general indication is to pro-
                                tect the larynx from injury if prolonged intubation is anticipated, such as in a prolonged ICU setting or in paralysis
                                associated with cervical spinal cord trauma. Rarer indications are bilateral vocal cord paralysis or a history of recur-
                                 rent allergy associated with larynogspasm.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                         Tracheostomy                                      Cricothyrotomy

                                 Position                Supine, head extended                             ⇐

                                 Incision                Transverse or vertical                            Stab incision through cricothyroid membrane

                                 Special                 None (most institutions have a “trach set”)       Scalpel is all that is initially needed in this
                                   instrumentation                                                         emergency setting

                                 Unique                  Local or general, intubated or not. Specialized   ⇐
                                   considerations        equipment and silicon trach cannulas selec-
                                                         tively arranged for.

                                 Antibiotics             None                                              ⇐

                                 Surgical Time           3–20 min                                          30 sec–2 min

                                 EBL                     Minimal                                           ⇐

                                 Postop Care             Warm humidification; suctioning; changing         ⇐; convert to tracheotomy as soon as
                                                         inner cannula; skin care; monitor for bleeding    convenient
                                                         and dislodgement; in emergency remove en-
                                                         tire tracheotomy tube

                                 Mortality               <1%                                               ⇐

===== PAGE 191 =====
Tracheotomy/Tracheostomy and Cricothyroidotomy        191

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                           Tracheostomy                                        Cricothyrotomy

                     Morbidity             Bleeding <5%                                        Subglottic stenosis risk if not converted
                                           cellulitis/tracheitis <5%
                                           tracheal stenosis <1%

                     Pain score            1–2                                                 2–4

                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All                                                ⇐

                     Male:Female            Dependent on underlying condition                  ⇐

                     Incidence              Common                                             ⇐
                     Etiology                Anticipated or actual airway obstruction,         Trauma
                                            prolonged intubation

                     Associated             Dependent on underlying condition, but typically   Trauma
                       conditions           cardiopulmonary or neurological conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Typically, there are three patient populations presenting for tracheostomy: (1) critically ill intubated patients in
                   chronic respiratory failure or following major trauma; (2) patients for whom tracheostomy is part of a scheduled
                   procedure (e.g., laryngectomy); and (3) patients with impending or total upper airway obstruction (e.g., Ludwig’s an-
                   gina, retropharyngeal abscess). If the latter constitutes life-threatening emergency, tracheotomy/cricothyroidotomy
                   may be the preferred approach. Aside from an occasional otherwise healthy patient in the 3rd category, all patients
                   presenting for tracheostomy are usually debilitated, have associated cardiac or pulmonary disease, and frequently
                   present with neurological and metabolic abnormalities.

                    Respiratory               Patients in group 1 usually require mechanical ventilation with PEEP to maintain ade-
                                              quate oxygenation. The continued application of PEEP may be an important consider-
                                              ation during their transport from ICU to OR. Patients in group 2 require a careful airway
                                              evaluation (see Anesthetic Considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220, and Laryngectomy,
                                              p. 206). Based on the assessment, the anesthesiologist must decide whether to choose a
                                              DL, an awake FOI, or a tracheostomy under local anesthesia to secure the airway. Patients
                                              in group 3 will usually require semi-emergent or emergent tracheostomy. Patients in all
                                              three groups should be evaluated for the presence of possible recurrent aspiration.
                                              Tests: CXR; ABG, as indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular            All patients may have significant cardiac risk factors, including smoking, ETOH abuse,
                                              male gender, ↑ cholesterol, family Hx, and HTN. Some patients may have recently under-
                                              gone major cardiac surgery and may be on pharmacological inotropic support, with full
                                              invasive monitoring, including PA line.
                                              Tests: ECG, and other tests as indicated, in patients of the 2nd group

                    Neurological              Preop neurological deficits should be fully documented.

                    Hematologic               In cases of malignancy or chronic disease, coagulopathies or anemia may be present
                                              Tests: CBC; Coagulation studies.

                    Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             Standard premedication (p. B-1) in elective cases. Premedication is best avoided in criti-
                                              cally ill patients and patients with symptoms of upper airway obstruction.

===== PAGE 192 =====
192   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA in intubated patients, or in patients who pose no problems for conventional DL and
                                tracheal intubation. In the presence of significant airway compromise or anticipated very difficult intubation local
                                anesthesia may be required. Most tracheostomies are elective or semiurgent and are performed under GA. Patients
                                with ↑ mucosal swelling (e.g., generalized edema, prolonged intubation) and ↑ tissue fragility (e.g., chronic steroid
                                therapy) are at risk for tracheal mucosal separation → creation of a false passage during tracheostomy. This will con-
                                stitute a true emergency (see Postoperative Complications, below).
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                          If already intubated (group 1, above), convert preexisting ICU sedation to GA, using care-
    Otolaryngology—

                                Induction
                                                          fully titrated induction (e.g., etomidate 0.2–0.3 mg/kg iv) or an inhalational agent. If not
                                                          intubated, and no airway problems are anticipated, a standard induction (p. B-2) may be
                                                          appropriate. If airway problems are anticipated, an awake FOI or tracheostomy performed
                                                          under local anesthesia may be the techniques of choice (see Anesthetic Considerations
                                                          for Neck Dissection, p. 220, and Laryngectomy, p. 206). In any event, the anesthesiologist
                                                          should be prepared to deal with a failed intubation and have a surgeon immediately avail-
                                                          able to perform cricothyrotomy/tracheostomy if ventilation proves impossible.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Full muscle relaxation is required. FiO2 = 1.0 usually is
                                                          required before insertion of the tracheostomy tube. This high O2 concentration, combined
                                                          with electrocautery, may precipitate airway fire (see Postoperative Complications, below).
                                                          A cuffed ETT should be used to prevent O2 from leaking into the surgical site. In order to
                                                          avoid inadvertent ETT cuff puncture, consider advancing the ETT closer toward the carina,
                                                          before the trachea is opened. The trachea is usually opened above the cuff, and the ETT is
                                                          slowly retracted cephalad, under direct vision by the surgeon (NOTE: Do not remove the
                                                          ETT completely!). Sterile gas sampling tubing, extra ETTs, and anesthesia circuit should be
                                                          readily available (see Maintenance for Laryngectomy, p. 207). After the tracheostomy tube
                                                          is secured, it should be suctioned and connected to the anesthesia circuit. Verify the ETCO2
                                                          tracing, 3 the inflation pressures, and remove the ETT.

                                Emergence                 Considerations for group 2 and 3 patients are described above. Patients in the first group
                                                          will continue on ventilatory support in the ICU. The tracheostomy tube must be carefully
                                                          suctioned, and the delivered O2 should be humidified. Opioid sedation will minimize reac-
                                                          tion to suctioning in the early postop period. Tracheostomy tubes should not be removed
                                                          for at least the first 5–7 days until a track is formed.

                                Blood and Fluid           IV: 18 ga × 1                          EBL is typically minimal, when the tracheostomy is
                                   Requirements           NS/LR @ 2–3 mL/kg/h                    performed as an isolated procedure

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)             Avoid ECG pad placement in the prepped area. In-
                                                                                                 vasive monitoring may be appropriate depending
                                                                                                 on the patient’s condition.

                                Positioning               Shoulder roll                          A shoulder roll is usually placed, and patient’s neck
                                                          3 and pad pressure points              extended, which may result in ETT cuff migrating
                                                          3 eyes                                 cephalad, closer to the incision site (danger of inad-
                                                                                                 vertent perforation by the surgeon on entering the
                                                                                                 trachea!). Make sure the ETT is positioned at the
                                                                                                 sufficient depth and taped securely.

                                Complications             Pneumothorax                           Pneumothorax may occur with a low neck dissection,
                                                          Pneumomediastinum                      or if a false passage (see Postop Complications, below)
                                                          Hemorrhage                             has been created during the tracheostomy tube inser-
                                                          Aspiration of blood                    tion. Dx and Rx—see Anesthetic Considerations for
                                                                                                 Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy, p. 184.
                                                          False tracheal passage/tracheal        This is an airway emergency and must be quickly
                                                            disruption                           recognized (absent CO2, ↑ PIP, absent or very dis-
                                                                                                 tant breath sounds). Reintroduction of the existing
                                                          Difficult ETT insertion/reinsertion    ETT from the proximal trachea should be attempted.

===== PAGE 193 =====
Tracheotomy/Tracheostomy and Cricothyroidotomy                    193

                    Complications              Difficult ETT insertion/reinsertion         Rigid bronchoscope should be available to rees-
                      (cont’d)                 (cont’d)                                    tablish the airway, in case of a failed reintubation.
                                                                                           An alternative approach is to insert a large-bore
                                                                                           iv catheter into the tracheal lumen distal to the
                                                                                           tracheostomy site and jet-ventilate the patient.
                                                                                           Insertion of an airway exchange catheter through
                                                                                           the bronchoscopy elbow adapter attached to the
                                                                                           existing ETT has been advocated prior to trache-

                                                                                                                                                                   Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                           ostomy tube insertion in patients at high risk for

                                                                                                                                                                     Otolaryngology—
                                                                                           this complication.
                                               Airway fire                                 Tracheostomy fires are usually not catastrophic,
                                                                                           possibly because the tracheostomy acts as a vent.
                                                                                           Rx: immediately disconnect the patient from the
                                                                                           anesthesia machine, extinguish the fire with NS,
                                                                                           and ventilate the lungs with room air using a self-
                                                                                           inflating bag. Removing or changing the existing
                                                                                           ETT at this point may be more risky than leaving it
                                                                                           in, especially if the patient was previously difficult
                                                                                           to intubate or the airway has become edematous.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Pneumothorax                                See Postoperative complications after L
                                                                                                                                  aryngoscopy/
                                               Pneumomediastinum                           Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy, p. 189.
                                               Hemorrhage
                                               Occlusion of the tracheostomy               This could be due to secretions, mucus plug, blood,
                                                 tube                                      or positioning of the tube in the mainstem bron-
                                                                                           chus or against the tracheal wall.
                                               Tracheostomy tube displacement              Reintubate orally or through the tracheostomy site

                    Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)
                      management               IV opioids

                    Tests                      CXR                                         3 tracheostomy tube position and 3 for evidence
                                                                                           of either pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Atkins JH, Mirza N: Anesthetic considerations and surgical caveats for awake airway surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28(3):
                        555–75.
                     2. Brown BR: Anaesthesia for ear, nose, throat and maxillofacial procedures. In: Prys-Roberts C, Brown BR, eds. International
                        Practice of Anaesthesia. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford: 1996, 2–9.
                     3. Chee WK, Benumof JL: Airway fire during tracheostomy: extubation may be contraindicated. Anesthesiology 1998; 89:1576–8.
                     4. Donlon JV, Feldman MA: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 6th edition.
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2005, 2527–49.
                     5. Mcguire G, El-Beheiry H, Brown D: Loss of the airway during tracheostomy: rescue oxygenation and re-establishment of the
                        airway. Can J Anesth 2001; 48:697–700.
                     6. Rogers ML, Nickalls RWD, Brackenbury ET, et al: Airway fire during tracheostomy: prevention strategies for surgeons and
                        anaesthetists. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2001; 83:376–80.
                     7. Sheinbein DS, Loeb RG: Laser surgery and fire hazards in ear, nose, and throat surgeries. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28(3):
                        485–96.

===== PAGE 194 =====
194   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                INTUBATION FOR EPIGLOTTITIS
                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Epiglottitis is an acute inflammation and swelling of the epiglottis, associated with a generalized systemic toxic-
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                ity, usually due to Haemophilus influenza Type B. It also can be caused by β-hemolytic streptococci, staphylo-
    Otolaryngology—

                                cocci, pneumococci, or unusual pathogens among immunocompromised individuals and drug/alcohol abusers.
                                It occasionally results in total laryngeal obstruction and death 2° asphyxia. At one time, the typical patient was
                                a previously healthy child 3–5 yr old; however, since the advent of the H-flu vaccine, epiglottitis is more com-
                                mon in adults (predominantly males). The most common presenting symptoms are sore throat, dysphagia/
                                odynophagia, fever, respiratory difficulty, and drooling. Pediatric patients may appear toxic on presentation.

                                Airway                    Enlarged epiglottis seen frequently on neck x-ray. Neck tenderness or swelling also
                                                          observed in some patients. Patients with stridor are at high risk for upper airway
                                                          obstruction.

                                Respiratory               The patient, typically sitting upright, may display hoarseness, muffled voice, dyspnea, and
                                                          chest-wall retractions. NB: Rapid treatment should be instituted instead of performing
                                                          time-consuming investigations. The sudden development of respiratory obstruction in the
                                                          x-ray suite could have a disastrous outcome.

                                Hematologic               A high leukocyte count usually is found in these patients.
                                                          Tests: Blood drawing before the airway is secured may be inadvisable.

                                Premedication             None

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. Patients presenting with imminent or actual airway obstruction should be intubated
                                immediately. Airway management for adult patients presenting with mild-to-moderate symptoms is controversial.
                                Although routine prophylactic intubation of these patients may not be necessary, 18% subsequently develop com-
                                plete airway obstruction; thus, close monitoring is mandatory if intubation is deferred. It is imperative to realize that
                                total airway obstruction can occur suddenly and without warning.
                                An experienced anesthesiologist should be present for this procedure. In the pediatric patient, it is critical that nei-
                                ther visualization of the epiglottis nor other maneuvers be attempted to confirm the Dx before anesthesia. In adults,
                                it has been suggested that indirect laryngoscopy or FOB may be performed without the risk of precipitating complete
                                airway obstruction, although this approach is controversial.

                                Induction                 If an iv is in place, atropine 0.02 mg/kg may be given to the pediatric patient to prevent
                                                          vagal reflexes resulting from manipulation of the inflamed epiglottis. If no iv access is
                                                          available, inhalation induction (sevoflurane in FiO2 = 1.0) with the patient in the sitting
                                                          position should be used. Intramuscular injection should be avoided to prevent agita-
                                                          tion, crying, and subsequent total airway obstruction (iv line is placed after induction
                                                          of anesthesia). An experienced ENT surgeon, ready to perform an emergency tracheos-
                                                          tomy, must be present at induction. Early application of CPAP is essential to maintain the
                                                          upper airway patency. Inhalation induction may be prolonged and intubation extremely
                                                          difficult. Different sizes of ETTs must be available.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3)

                                Emergence                 The patient will remain intubated for 24–48 h and should be kept sedated and restrained
                                                          to prevent accidental extubation.

===== PAGE 195 =====
Zenker’s Diverticulectomy (Open Approach)              195

                    Blood and fluid            IV: 18–20 ga (adult)                        Minimal blood loss
                       requirements              22–26 ga (child)
                                               NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h (adult);                Fluid requirements may be ↑ 2° fever and
                                                 @ 1.5 mL/kg/h (child)                     dehydration.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                                                                                                                                                                  Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                    Otolaryngology—
                    Complications              POPE (postobstructive pulmonary             A short-lived POPE occasionally occurs after relief
                                                 edema)                                    of the obstruction and must be treated with IPPV.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Accidental extubation                       These complications can prove fatal. The blockages
                                               ETT blockage                                are sometimes due to crusting of the ETT 2° insuf-
                                                                                           ficient humidification.

                    Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                                Postop sedation and manual restraints are often
                      management               IV opioids                                  required.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Crockett DM, Healy GB, McGill TJ, et al: Airway management of acute supraglottitis at the Children’s Hospital, Boston:
                        1980–1985. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1988; 97(2Pt1):114–19.
                     2. Dort JC, Frohlich AM, Tate RB: Acute epiglottis in adults: diagnosis and treatment in 43 patients. J Otolaryngol 1994;
                        23:281–5.
                     3. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.
                     4. Park KW, Darvish A, Lowenstein E: Airway management for adult patients with acute epiglottitis. Anesthesiology 1998;
                        88:254–61
                     5. Senior BA, Radkowski D, MacArthur C, et al: Changing patterns in pediatric supraglottitis: a multi-institutional review, 1980
                        to 1992. OHNS 1994; 110:203–10.
                     6. Verbruggen K, Halewyck S, Deron P, Foulon I, Gordts F: Epiglottitis and related complications in adults. Case reports and
                        review of the literature. B-ENT 2012; 8(2):143–8.

                   ZENKER’S DIVERTICULECTOMY (OPEN APPROACH)
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Zenker’s diverticulum is a herniation of mucosa through the posterior hypopharyngeal wall immedi-
                   ately above the cricopharyngeus muscle and below the inferior constrictor in an area called Killian’s dehiscence. This
                   is an acquired disorder, usually seen in the 6th to 9th decades of life and felt secondary to tonic spasm or achalasia of
                   the cricopharyngeus muscle. Clinically, patients may experience dysphagia, globus, coughing, and regurgitation of
                   undigested food. Weight loss and aspiration pneumonia can be seen in severe cases. Barium swallow is usually diag-
                   nostic. Endoscopy will reveal the presence of a pouch of variable size posterior to the cricopharyngeus muscle often
                   filled with undigested debris. Cricopharyngeal achalasia may present in the absence of a well-formed diverticulum
                   with much the same symptom complex. Treatment is usually aimed at division of the cricopharyngeus muscle and
                   eradication of the pouch.
                   Variant approaches. Open: Under GA with muscle relaxation, an incision is made in the left side of the neck to
                   expose the diverticulum and cricopharyngeus muscle. The muscle is cut, the diverticulum resected, and the hypo-
                   pharyngeal defect closed. In patients with pure cricopharyngeal spasm, the muscle alone is cut. A drain is placed,

===== PAGE 196 =====
196   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                and the wound is closed. A nasogastric tube may be placed for postop feeding. Aspiration precautions should be
                                observed at both induction (consider awake intubation in severely symptomatic patients) and reversal of anesthesia,
                                as this is a common comorbidity in patients with Zenker’s diverticulum. Endoscopic: Selected patients may be can-
                                didates for endoscopic treatment of a Zenker’s diverticulum. This is better described as diverticulotomy rather than
                                diverticulectomy because the redundant hypopharyngeal mucosa is not removed, and the cricopharyngeus muscle
                                is not divided in its entirety. Rather, the common wall separating the diverticulum from the esophagus is reduced to
                                prevent food and debris from collecting within the confines of the diverticulum. With the patient under general anes-
                                thesia and muscle relaxation, an esophagodiverticuloscope is placed transorally and advanced into the hypopharynx.
                                The endoscope is deployed to visualize clearly the opening into the diverticulum. The common wall separating the
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                diverticulum from the true esophageal inlet is then cut, either with a stapler or with a CO2 laser.
    Otolaryngology—

                                Usual preop diagnosis: Dysphagia; Zenker’s diverticulum; cricopharyngeal spasm

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Open                                          Endoscopic

                                 Position                Supine; table 90°; head extended              Supine

                                 Special                 Anode or laser ETT; microscope                ⇐ ; endoscopic stapler or CO2 laser
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                                                                Keep O2 < 30% and avoid N2O if lasering.
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g and metronidazole 500 mg;
                                                         clindamycin 600 mg

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h                                         30 min to 1 h

                                 EBL                     < 25 mL                                       0–25 mL

                                 Postop care             Reflux precautions should be observed;        Reflux precautions should be observed
                                                         patients may require nasogastric tube
                                                         feeding for several days

                                 Mortality               < 1%                                          < 1%

                                 Morbidity               Fistula formation < 5%                        Perforation < 5%
                                                         Vocal cord paralysis                          Aspiration
                                                         Hematoma 1–5%
                                                         Infection 1–5%
                                                         Aspiration

                                 Pain score              3–5                                           3–5

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               60–90

                                 Male:Female             1.5:1

                                 Incidence               1 in 50,000; Caucasians

                                 Etiology                GERD; neurogenerative disorders

                                 Associated              GERD
                                   conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                (See p. 184)

===== PAGE 197 =====
Laryngeal Framework Surgery (Thyroplasty, Arytenoid Adduction, Injection Laryngoplasty)                197

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Aly A, Devitt PG, Jamieson GG: Evolution of surgical treatment for pharyngeal pouch. Br J Surg 2004; 9(6):657–64.
                     2. Dzeletovic I, Ekbom DC, Baron TH: Flexible endoscopic and surgical management of Zenker’s diverticulum. Expert Rev
                        Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012; 6(4):449–65.
                     3. Feeley MA, Righi PD, Weisberger EC, et al: Zenker’s diverticulum: analysis of surgical complications from diverticulectomy
                        and cricopharyngeal mytomoy. Laryngoscope 1999; 109(6):858–61.
                     4. Huang B, Payne WS, Cameron AJ: Surgical management for recurrent pharygoesophageal (Zenker’s) diverticulum. Ann
                        Thoracic Surg 1984; 37(3):189–91.
                     5. van Overbeek JJ: Pathogenesis and methods of treatment of Zenker’s diverticulum. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2003;

                                                                                                                                                               Head and Neck Surgery
                        112(7):583–93.

                                                                                                                                                                 Otolaryngology—
                   LARYNGEAL FRAMEWORK SURGERY (THYROPLASTY,
                   ARYTENOID ADDUCTION, INJECTION LARYNGOplasty)
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Thyroplasty is a surgical technique of medializing a paralyzed vocal fold via placement of an implant
                   inserted through the cartilage of the thyroid ala. Under local anesthesia with intravenous sedation, a skin incision
                   is made at the level of the larynx and the thyroid cartilage exposed. Using a small saw, drill bit, or knife, a window
                   is cut in the cartilage to the level of the inner perichondrium. Lateral pressure is then applied to the paralyzed side
                   to gauge the amount of medialization necessary to improve phonation. Because the shape and size of the implant is
                   created based on the location and degree of medialization needed to improve the voice, it is important for the patient
                   to be awake and able to phonate during the procedure. Often the patient is kept in a state of deeper sedation in the
                   beginning of the case and then is lightened as the case proceeds to allow the patient to be responsive and interactive
                   with the surgeon. This can be a challenge for the anesthesiologist to strike a happy medium between patient comfort
                   and coherence. After the desired degree of medialization is obtained, the implant is secured in place and the wound
                   closed over a drain.
                   Description: Arytenoid adduction is often performed in conjunction with thyroplasty. This involves placement of a
                   suture around the muscular process of the arytenoid cartilage, which, when tightened, causes posteromedial rotation
                   of the vocal process and adduction of the vocal fold. Usually the technique is employed when there is a persistent gap
                   between the vocal folds posteriorly.
                   Description: Injection laryngoplasty refers to medialization of a paralyzed vocal fold by means of injection,
                   whether percutaneous or endoscopic. Its minimally invasive nature is its chief advantage over thyroplasty or aryte-
                   noid adduction. However, the longevity of the injected material as well as its side effect profile are major determi-
                   nants as to whether or not this procedure should be considered. Traditionally, Teflon was the injectable material of
                   choice. However, because of the potential for a foreign body reaction, Teflon has been replaced by more biocompat-
                   ible materials, such as acellular human dermis, fat, gelfoam, and calcium hydroxylapatite to name a few. Because of
                   the low viscosity of some of these injectibles, many patients are candidates for percutaneous injection, which can
                   be performed in the office or procedure room under simple topical anesthetic. The patient is seated upright and the
                   nasal cavity topically anesthetized with lidocaine 2% and neosynephrine. A fiberoptic rhinolaryngoscope attached
                   to a camera and television monitor is then passed transnasally to the level of the glottis. Through a 25- or 27-gauge
                   needle, the desired material is injected either transcartilagenously, through the cricothyroid membrane, or under
                   the thyroid ala into the paraglottic space. Observing on the monitor, the material is injected until the desired degree
                   of medialization is obtained. This is well tolerated by patients with minimal pain. Airway obstruction or bleeding
                   are exceedingly rare.
                   For those who request or require injection under GETA a 5.0 microlaryngeal tube is desirable. Jet ventilation and
                   apneic techniques can also be used. An operating laryngoscope is advanced to the level of the glottis and s uspended
                   from a Mayo stand. The paryalyzed vocal fold is then injected, usually at the mid and posterior aspects, until
                   adequate medialization is seen. Usually this entails slight overcorrection such that the medialized fold will now be
                   slightly across midline. Hemostasis if needed is usually obtained with epinephrine-soaked pledgets placed directly on
                   the vocal fold. The scope is then withdrawn and the procedure terminated.

===== PAGE 198 =====
198   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                It is important for the anesthesiologist to be aware if a patient has undergone a prior medialization procedure. This
                                is not a contraindication to orotracheal intubation for subsequent procedures requiring GETA. However, traumatic
                                intubation or the use of a tube larger than 6 mm may cause trauma to the adducted fold. A laceration of the vocal fold
                                can potentially expose or dislodge a thyroplasty implant, making it more likely to become infected and potentially
                                extrude.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Vocal fold paralysis

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                                         Thyroplasty                        Arytenoid Adduction           Injection Laryngoplasty

                                 Position                Supine                             ⇐                             ⇐

                                 Special                 Head and neck set; headlights      –                             Operating laryngoscope; laryn-
                                   instrumentation                                                                        geal injection needles; jet venti-
                                                                                                                          lation setup.

                                 Unique                  Overmedialization of the vocal     If GETA is requested, intu-   Overmedialization of the vocal
                                   considerations        fold can potentially cause         bate with 5.0 microlaryn-     fold can potentially cause stri-
                                                         stridor and dyspnea; coordina-     geal tube.                    dor and dyspnea.
                                                         tion between the surgeon and
                                                         anesthesiologists is essential
                                                         to time lightening of anesthe-
                                                         sia; stimulation can cause
                                                         coughing.

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g                      ⇐                             ⇐

                                 Surgical time           2h                                 ⇐                             30 min

                                 EBL                     < 10 mL                            10–20 mL                      Minimal

                                 Postop care             Decadron intravenously for 24      ⇐                             Racemic epinephrine; cool mist
                                                         h; racemic epinephrine; cool                                     as needed
                                                         mist.

                                 Mortality               Rare                               ⇐                             ⇐

                                 Morbidity               Need for revision: 10–20%          ⇐                             Need for repeat injection common
                                                         Transient dyspnea or               ⇐                             5–10%
                                                            laryngospasm
                                                         Infection: < 5%                    ⇐                             Rare
                                                         Airway obstruction requiring       ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            tracheostomy: 1%
                                                         Extrusion: rare

                                 Pain score              3–4                                4–5                           1–2

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               18 and over

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Common

                                 Etiology                Surgical trauma to recurrent laryngeal nerve; cancer; trauma; idiopathic

                                 Associated              Cancer; coronary artery disease; lung disease; tumors of skull base
                                   conditions

===== PAGE 199 =====
Laryngeal Framework Surgery (Thyroplasty, Arythenoid Adduction, Injection Laryngoplasty)                  199

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Cotter CS, Avidano MA, Crary MA, et al: Laryngeal complications after type 1 thyroplasty. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;
                        113(6): 671–3.
                     2. Damrose EJ, Berke GS: Advances in the management of glottic insufficiency. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2003;
                        11(6):480–4.
                     3. Flint PW, Purcell LL, Cummings CW: Pathophysiology and indications for medialization thyroplasty in patients with
                        dysphagia and aspiration. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1997; 116(3):349–54.
                     4. Herman C: Medialization thyroplasty for unilateral vocal cord paralysis. AORN J 2002; 75(3):512–22.
                     5. Isshiki N, Morita H, Okamura H, et al: Thyroplasty as a new phonosurgical technique. Acta Otolaryngol 1974; 78(5–6): 451–7.

                                                                                                                                                                 Head and Neck Surgery
                     6. Isshiki N, Taira T, Tanabe M: Surgical alteration of the vocal pitch. J Otolarygnol 1983; 12(5):335–40.

                                                                                                                                                                   Otolaryngology—
                     7. Isshiki N, Tsuji DH, Yamamoto Y, et al: Midline lateralization thyroplasty for adductor spasmodic dysphonia. Ann Otol Rhinol
                        Laryngol 2000; 109(2):187–93.
                     8. Pou AM, Carrau RL, Eibling DE et al: Laryngeal framework surgery for the management f aspiration in high vagal lesions.
                        Am J Otolaryngol 1998; 19(1):1–7.
                     9. Weinman EC, Maragos NE: Airway compromise in thyroplasty surgery. Laryngoscope 2000; 110(7):1082–5.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   The laryngeal framework surgery (LFS) is the surgery of choice for dysphonias resulting from incomplete glottic
                   closure or inadequate vocal fold tension. With thyroplasty, direct surgery on the vocal folds is avoided, eliminating
                   the possibility of scarring and voice aggravation. Type I (medialization) thyroplasty is most commonly performed for
                   the unilateral VC paralysis or bowing (in elderly patients), and involves placement of a small silicon implant within
                   the larynx on the affected side.

                    Airway                     No airway problems are usually encountered in these patients.

                    Cardiovascular             Elderly patients may present with advanced cerebrovascular, cardiovascular, or pulmonary
                                               disease. Preop pulmonary aspiration due to glottic incompetence is uncommon, but may
                                               be seen when the VC paralysis is of central origin, affecting both motor and sensory com-
                                               ponents of the VC innervation.

                    Tests                      EKG; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory                 Tests, as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication              Standard premedication with iv midazolam can frequently be reduced or avoided, espe-
                                               cially in the elderly.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Most commonly, thyroplasty is performed under MAC, which allows the surgeon to
                   achieve optimal improvement in the patient’s voice quality (sometimes facilitated by visualization of the VC move-
                   ment through a nasally introduced flexible fiberoptic endoscope) before locking the laryngeal implant in place. It can
                   also be performed under GA, when the concomitant use of the LMA and flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope allows a
                   real-time assessment of VC positioning. Arytenoid adduction and injection laryngoplasty are usually performed
                   under GETA with the use of a small (5.0 mm ID) MLT ETT.
                   The essential surgical requirements for thyroplasty performed under MAC include patient immobility for an effec-
                   tive injection of a local anesthetic; alternating levels of MAC sedation, depending on the part of the surgery (deep
                   level of sedation during the surgical approach to the cartilage, light for the implant placement, and deep again during
                   the surgical closure); absence of straining/bucking/coughing during the implant placement and manipulation on the
                   thyroid cartilage necessitates the use of iv opioids.
                   GETA for arytenoid adduction and injection laryngoplasty requires full muscle relaxation with quick return of
                   protective airway reflexes and smooth emergence from anesthesia.
                   When providing MAC for thyroplasty, a quick patient transition to the “light” state for the implant placement is
                   required. A combination of a small dose (1–2 mcg/kg) of iv fentanyl with the iv propofol infusion, or iv midazolam

===== PAGE 200 =====
200   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                with iv remifentanil infusion (typically, 0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/min to avoid severe respiratory depression), will achieve
                                the stated objective. For a thyroplasty performed under GA, as well as for the GETA employed for a arytenoid
                                adduction and injection laryngoplasty surgery, the use of TIVA (see Introduction, Anesthesiologist’s Perspectives,
                                 p. 178) has been shown to be highly beneficial. Injection laryngoplasty procedures can be very short and, if properly
                                 coordinated with the surgeon, can occasionally be performed without tracheal intubation, using an apneic technique
                                 following full preoxygenation, iv induction, administration of a relatively large dose of succinylcholine (1.5–2 mg/kg)
                                 and brief mask hyperventilation with FiO2 = 1.0.
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                Blood and fluid            IV: 20 ga × 1                            EBL is minimal during all the LFS procedures.
    Otolaryngology—

                                   Requirements            LR @ 2 cc/kg/h

                                Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)               Even in patients with preexisting significant CV dis-
                                                           ± arterial line                          ease, A-line monitoring is usually not necessary.

                                Positioning                Table may be turned 90–180°              To prevent claustrophobia, inform the patient
                                                           3 and pad pressure points                presenting for thyroplasty under MAC that his/her
                                                           3 eyes                                    face will be partially covered with surgical towels.

                                Complications              Overmedialization                        Can be quickly corrected by the surgeon
                                                           Stridor and dysphonia

                                    POSTOPERATIVE
                                 Complications             Wound hematoma
                                                           Airway obstruction
                                                           Stridor
                                                           Extrusion of the prosthesis

                                 Pain                      Short-acting parenteral opioids
                                   management              (p. C-1) are usually sufficient.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Grundler S, Stacey MR: Thyroplasty under general anesthesia using a laryngeal mask airway and fibreoptic bronchoscope.
                                     Can J Anaesth 1999; 46(5Pt1):460–3.
                                  2. Hoffman H, McCabe D, McCulloch T, et al: Laryngeal collagen injection as an adjunct to medialization laryngoplasty.
                                     Laryngoscope 2002; 112(8 Pt1):1407–13.
                                  3. Lundy DS, Casiano RR, Xue JW: Can maximum phonation time predict voice outcome after thyroplasty type I? Laryngoscope
                                     2004; 114:1447–54.
                                  4. Razzaq I, Wooldridge W: A series of thyroplasty cases under general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2000; 85:547–9.
                                  5. Remacle M, Lawson G, Jamart J, et al: Treatment of vocal fold immobility by injectable homologous collagen: short-term
                                     results. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2006; 263:205–9.
                                  6. Remacle M, Lawson G, Mayné A: Use of a laryngeal mask during medialization laryngoplasty. Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol
                                     (Bord) 2003; 124:335–8.

                                TRACHEAL AND CRICOTRACHEAL RESECTION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Prolonged endotracheal intubation and complications from tracheotomy account for most cases of
                                subglottic or tracheal stenosis. Wegener’s disease commonly affects the subglottic airway, and secondary dyspnea
                                may be the first presenting sign of the disease. In females in the 4th to 6th decades of life, subglottic stenosis can be
                                idiopathic. Whatever the etiology, subglottic and tracheal stenosis can be a major source of morbidity for afflicted

===== PAGE 201 =====
Tracheal and Cricotracheal Resection         201

                   patients, resulting in dyspnea, dysphonia, and tracheostomy dependence. In selected individuals, resection of the
                   stenotic region with primary repair can often produce marked and sustained relief of symptoms in a single-stage
                   procedure, often without need for a temporary tracheostomy.
                   Tracheal resection is the treatment of choice in patients with isolated tracheal stenosis. Up to four to five rings
                   of cartilage can be resected, more if releasing maneuvers to mobilize the larynx and intrathoracic trachea are
                   performed. Induction of anesthesia is simplest in patients with preexisting tracheostomies. For those patients who
                   present without a tracheostomy, a tracheostomy under local anesthesia can be performed at or immediately below
                   the stenotic segment. If possible, it is preferable to dilate the stenosis and proceed to endotracheal intubation to

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                   avoid further injury to the trachea with a fresh tracheotomy. With the patient in the supine position, a transverse

                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   cervical incision is made. The thyroid isthmus is divided and separated from the cervical trachea. Careful blunt
                   dissection on the lateral aspects of the diseased segment is performed to avoid injury to the recurrent laryngeal
                   nerves. A vertical incision is made along the face of the stenotic segment until a healthy complete ring of cartilage
                   is identified above and below the stenotic segment. The anesthesiologist withdraws the ETT up into the subglottis,
                   and the diseased segment of trachea is resected. At this time, the surgeon may intubate the distal segment of tra-
                   chea to afford better access to the superior aspect of the diseased segment. In this case, the breathing circuit will
                   need to be switched from the orotracheal tube to the distal tube. The distal trachea can be more easily mobilized
                   superiorly following blunt finger dissection along the anterior tracheal wall into the mediastinum. The orotracheal
                   tube is then advanced inferiorly into the distal healthy segment. The healthy distal and proximal segments of
                   trachea are then reanastomosed over the ETT using interrupted sutures. The wound is closed and a drain placed.
                   If the patient is to remain intubated overnight, it is important to ensure that the cuff of the endotracheal tube
                   remains inferior to the suture line so as not to put tension on the repair. If the patient is to be extubated in the OR,
                    care should be taken to minimize coughing or bucking so as not to rupture the repair site. Endoscopy can be per-
                    formed prior to transport from the operating room to ensure that at least one vocal fold is mobile. If neither vocal
                    fold is mobile, a bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve injury should be suspected and a tracheostomy performed.
                    Regardless of whether or not the patient is extubated immediately or later, fiberoptic laryngoscopy to assess vocal
                    fold motion postop is standard of care. Voice quality is not an adequate assesment of vocal fold function. A para-
                    lyzed vocal fold can be midline with complete compensation by the mobile fold and no overt dysphonia. In bilat-
                    eral vocal fold paralysis, the voice is often normal, and the patient’s only symptoms will be dyspnea and stridor.
                   Cricotracheal resection allows single-stage repair of subglottic or a combined subglottic/tracheal stenosis. The
                   procedure is similar to that of tracheal resection with several caveats. It is important to carefully gauge the rela-
                   tionship of the stenosis to the vocal folds. Stenosis that involves the vocal folds is a contraindication to cricotra-
                   cheal resection. The anterior arch of the cricoid cartilage is usually resected, along with the subglottic soft tissue
                   component of the stenosis, preserving the cricoid plate. This creates a cradle into which the trachea will slide
                   superiorly. No more than one-third of the inferior aspect of the cricoid plate can be resected. More than this will
                   disrupt the posterior cricoarytenoid muscles and prevent vocal fold abduction during inspiration. As resection
                   proceeds, the ETT will be withdrawn above the glottis. It is helpful at this point to attach an umbilical tape to the
                   distal tip of the ETT to allow the surgeon to assist the anesthesiologist in advancing the tube back through the
                   glottis and into the trachea when the resection is complete. The trachea is sutured to the thyroid cartilage anteri-
                   orly and the cricoid ring laterally; the wound is closed; and a drain may be placed. The patient is extubated in the
                   OR and vocal fold mobility checked. Tracheostomy is only required in the setting of bilateral vocal fold paralysis
                   and should otherwise be avoided. As with tracheal resection, a preop assesment of vocal fold motion is critical in
                   planning surgery. If unilateral paralysis is present preop, great care is needed to minimize potential injury to the
                   contralateral recurrent laryngeal nerve.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Subglottic stenosis; tracheal stenosis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                    Cricotracheal
                                             Tracheal Resection                                                     Resection

                     Position                Supine                                                                 Supine

                     Incision                Transverse cervical                                                    Transverse cervical

                     Special                 Major head and neck tray; headlights                                   ⇐
                       instrumentation

===== PAGE 202 =====
202   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                                                        Cricotracheal
                                                           Tracheal Resection                                                           Resection

                                 Unique                    Intubation may be difficult owing to degree of stenosis; dilation may be     ⇐
                                 considerations            required prior to intubation; awake tracheostomy under local anesthe-
                                                           sia may be necessary in select cases.

                                 Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1 g and metronidazole 500 mg; clindamycin 600 mg; vanco-           ⇐
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                           mycin 1 g; piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g
    Otolaryngology—

                                 Surgical time             3h                                                                           ⇐

                                 EBL                       50–100 mL                                                                    ⇐

                                 Postop care               Most patients can be extubated at the conclusion of surgery; coughing        ⇐
                                                           and stimulation should be minimized; if significant edema is expected,
                                                           patients may remain intubated for 24 to 48 h then extubated; patients
                                                           may require temporary NG tube feedings if laryngeal releasing maneu-
                                                           vers performed; monitoring in ICU setting for airway compromise or
                                                           subcutaneous emphysema required postop

                                 Mortality                 1–2%                                                                         ⇐

                                 Morbidity                 Restenosis: 10%                                                              10–15%
                                                           Vocal cord paralysis: 2–3%                                                   3–5%
                                                           Dehiscence: 5%                                                               < 5%
                                                           Subcutaneous emphysema: 1–2%                                                 1–2%
                                                           Airway edema requiring tracheotomy: 2%                                       5%

                                 Pain score                5–6                                                                          5–6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 All ages

                                 Male:Female               2:1

                                 Incidence                 1% of all patients requiring intubation

                                 Etiology                  Prolonged intubation; prior tracheostomy; Wegener’s disease; external trauma; neoplasm; radia-
                                                           tion; gastroesophageal reflux; idiopathic.

                                 Associated                Atherosclerosis; asthma; gastroesophageal reflux.
                                   conditions

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Brown BR: Anaesthesia for ear, nose, throat and maxillofacial procedures. In: Prys-Roberts C, Brown BR, eds. International
                                     Practice of Anaesthesia. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford: 1996, 2–9.
                                  2. Chee WK, Benumof JL: Airway fire during tracheostomy: extubation may be contraindicated. Anesthesiology 1998; 89:1576–8.
                                  3. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                                     Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.
                                  4. Hobai IA, Chhangani SV, Alfille PH: Anesthesia for tracheal resection and reconstruction. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30(4):
                                     709–30.
                                  5. McGuire G, El-Beheiry H, Brown D: Loss of the airway during tracheostomy: rescue oxygenation and re-establishment of the
                                     airway. Can J Anesth 2001; 48:697–700.
                                  6. Rogers ML, Nickalls RWD, Brackenbury ET, et al: Airway fire during tracheostomy: prevention strategies for surgeons and
                                     anaesthetists. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2001; 83:376–80.

===== PAGE 203 =====
Laryngectomy: Partial and Total       203

                   LARYNGECTOMY: PARTIAL AND TOTAL
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Either radiation, chemoradiation or surgery is commonly employed as primary treatment of laryngeal
                   squamous cell carcinoma. Selected tumors can be removed endoscopically, as reviewed above. Open procedures,
                   which may be primary or following recurrence after irradiation, are designed to fit tumor extent. If at least one cri-

                                                                                                                                                       Head and Neck Surgery
                   coarytenoid unit (innervated posterior cricoarytenoid muscle and working cricoarytenoid joint) is uninvolved by

                                                                                                                                                         Otolaryngology—
                   tumor, the patient may be a candidate for less than a total laryngectomy.
                   A vertical partial laryngectomy (VPL) involves removal of the affected true and false vocal folds, and up to one-
                   third of the contralateral folds including the anterior commissure. The contralateral cricoarytenoid unit is preserved,
                   and reconstruction often includes a pedicled sternohyoid flap as well as thyroid cartilage perichondrium. Exposure
                   and anesthetic considerations are similar to that of a total laryngectomy (discussed below) other than the fact that a
                   temporary tracheotomy is used in the partial laryngectomy.
                   A supraglottic laryngectomy (Figs. 3-4 and 3-5) or anterior horizontal partial laryngectomy (AHPL; Fig. 3-6)
                   involves removal of laryngeal structures superior to the true vocal cords. Both cricoarytenoid units remain. The
                   resection may include some of the base of tongue. Exposure and anesthetic considerations are the same as for for a
                   VPL, including the need for a temporary tracheotomy.
                   A supracricoid laryngectomy involves removal of the larynx from the top of the cricoid ring to the hyoid bone with
                   preservation of at least one arytenoid. A temporary tracheostomy is required. Cuts are made above the thyroid ala,
                   through the cricothyroid membrane, and anterior to the arytenoid cartilages. The epiglottis may be included in the
                   resection if necessary, depending upon the extent of the tumor. Blunt finger dissection anterior to the trachea into
                   the mediastinum is performed to allow for superior mobilization of the trachea. A cricohyoidopexy, involving the
                   suturing of the cricoid ring to the hyoid bone, is then performed with three heavy sutures. If the epiglottis has been
                   preserved, a cricohyoidoepiglottopexy is performed. The strap muscles are then used to reinforce the closure, and
                   drains are placed.

                                                         Epiglottis                               Lesion

                                                     True vocal cord

                                                   False vocal cord

                                                         Arytenoid

                                                                       Base of tongue

                               Figure 3-4. The larynx is viewed from the midline, as seen by the surgeon standing at
                               the head of the operating table. Unless the lesion extends posteriorly to the arytenoid,
                               the aryepiglottic fold is transected on each side by placing one blade of the dissecting
                               scissors into the laryngeal ventricle or above the false vocal cord and the other blade
                               in the pyriform sinus. The arytenoid on one side can be resected if the tumor extends
                               posteriorly to involve this structure. (Reproduced with permission from Montgomery
                               WW: Surgery of the Upper Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams & Wilkins,
                               Baltimore: 1996.)

===== PAGE 204 =====
204   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                          Figure 3-5. The repair following supraglottic partial laryngectomy begins by carefully
                                          approximating the margin of the mucous membrane of the pyriform sinus to the lateral
                                          margin of the laryngeal ventricle, or to the margin of resection above the false vocal cord.
                                          There is usually some distortion of the true vocal cord when the repair is accomplished,
                                          as is shown on the patient’s right side. The repair is continued anteriorly by placing
                                          multiple interrupted 3-0 chromic catgut sutures. (Reproduced with permission from
                                          Montgomery WW: Surgery of the Upper Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams &
                                          Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

                                          Figure 3-6. A: Horizontal incisions, corresponding to the mucosal incision, are made
                                          through the thyroid lamina. B: The specimen—including true and false vocal cords,
                                          the arytenoid, and a portion of the thyroid lamina—is resected en bloc. (Reproduced
                                          with permission from Montgomery WW: Surgery of the Upper Respiratory System, 3rd
                                          edition. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

===== PAGE 205 =====
Laryngectomy: Partial and Total      205

                   A total laryngectomy (TL) involves the resection of the entire larynx and can be done via an incision about 8 cm
                   long, low in the midline neck. An apron incision is often used instead, or the low incision is extended toward a mas-
                   toid tip to provide exposure for a neck dissection if indicated. The thyroid gland is often preserved, pedicled on its
                   superior and inferior vasculature after dividing the isthmus; but if indicated a partial thyroidectomy may be included.
                   The thyoid is resected with the specimen and the pharynx closed primarily. A nasogastric tube is used for nutrition
                   for all open laryngeal tumor surgery, unless the surgeon opts to provide nutrition via a tracheoesphageal puncture,
                   discussed below. As the remaining trachea is sutured to the anterior skin in a true tracheostoma, no tracheotomy
                   tube or ETT is required postop unless there is marked stomal edema or mechanical ventilaton is required, which is
                   not common.

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   If a TL is performed, a tracheoesphageal puncture (TEP) may be performed simultaneously. This involves the
                   creation of a tract or fistula between the trachea and the esophagus for placement of a voicing prosthesis (a one-
                   way valve that allows airflow from the trachea into the pharynx for alaryngeal speech). The voicing prosthesis may
                   be placed at the time of the laryngectomy or as a secondary procedure at a later date. If performed secondarily,
                   it is placed using the technique of rigid esophagoscopy (see previous section). If TEP is performed at the time
                   of laryngectomy, the valve can be placed simultaneously. Some surgeons prefer to place a red rubber catheter
                   instead, which can allow the patient to be fed via this route in lieu of a nasogastric or gastrostomy tube. After the
                   patient is deemed fit to start oral intake, the catheter can be exchanged secondarily for the voice prosthesis. If a
                   rubber catheter is used, the tube will protrude from the stoma, and care must be taken not to dislodge it during
                   suctioning or while removing or replacing the laryngectomy tube if one is temporarily used during the period of
                   postop edema.
                   A TL can be extended to include part of the hypopharyx or oropharynx as dictated by tumor extent. If flap recon-
                   struction is necessary because of the extent of the tumor, options include use of a pectoralis major myocutaneous
                   flap or a free flap, such as a radial free flap, to reconstruct less than a circumferential defect. If a circumferential
                   defect following resection exists (e.g., after resection of the superior cervical esophagus and the larynx), options for
                   reconstruction include use of a laparascopically harvested jejunal free flap, gastric pullup, or a tubed radial free flap
                   reinforced with a pectoralis major myogenous flap.
                   Postop care: Inpatient admission for 5–10 d; monitored bed or ICU for tracheostomy care or following more
                   extensive pharyngeal reconstruction; a cuffed tracheostomy tube (and a temporary tracheotomy) will usually be
                   required for partial laryngectomy patients or if the patient will require postop mechanical ventilation. A shorter
                   tracheostomy tube following a TL will be needed if there is significant peristomal edema or if mechanical ventila-
                   tion is required. General and drain management is similar to a neck dissection.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cancer of larynx; intractable aspiration with resultant pneumonia unresponsive to other
                   techniques

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Total or Partial                                                 Pharyngolaryngectomy

                     Position                Supine, head extended                                            ⇐

                     Special                 Major head/neck set; headlights                                  ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Laryngeal tumors may distort airway. Fiberoptic intubation or    ⇐
                       considerations        other management of the difficult airway should be considered.
                                             May be combined with neck dissection.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g and metronidazole 500 mg;                          ⇐
                                             clindamycin 600 mg

                     Surgical time           2–4 h; 4–8 if neck dissection added                              8 + h; reconstruction required
                                                                                                              +/− free flap

                     EBL                     50–300 mL                                                        ⇐
                                             With neck dissection: up to 500 mL.                              ⇐
                                             Transfusions rarely indicated.                                   ⇐

                     Postop care             Tracheotomy care, drain management; tube feedings                ⇐

                     Mortality               < 1%                                                             ⇐

===== PAGE 206 =====
206   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                          Total or Partial                                                Pharyngolaryngectomy

                                 Morbidity                Fistula formation: 5%: 15–20% if prior irradiation              1%
                                                          Hematoma: < 4%                                                  ⇐
                                                          Infection: < 5%                                                 ⇐
                                                          DVT/PE: < 1%                                                    ⇐

                                 Pain score               4–6                                                             4–7
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                40–80, occasionally older and younger

                                 Male:Female              3:1

                                 Incidence                Common

                                 Etiology                 Smoking; alcohol

                                 Associated               COPD; atherosclerosis; diabetes
                                   conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                See preop considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220.

                                Airway                     If a stridor at rest is present, its severity must be carefully evaluated. Patients with
                                                           symptoms and signs of severe obstruction (complaints of difficulty breathing, nocturnal
                                                           symptoms, sleeping upright, use of accessory muscles on inspiration at rest) will likely be
                                                           difficult to ventilate and intubate.

                                Respiratory                Patients with severe stridor may manifest baseline hypoxemia (with or without hyper-
                                                           carbia) 2° ↓ airway diameter and atelectases caused by ↓ ability to effectively handle
                                                           secretions.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. Although tracheostomy is universally performed in TL patients, smooth emergence
                                is still important 2° delicate suture lines. Full muscle relaxation is essential. Moderate ↓ BP (see Introduction, p. 178)
                                is desirable, but may be limited by concomitant cardiovascular disease.

                                Induction                  There is no universal recipe for management of the partially obstructed airway. One
                                                          a pproach is outlined below.
                                                           If stridor is absent and airway assessment is normal, standard induction followed by DL is
                                                           appropriate. In patients with preexisting stridor, attempts to secure an airway while awake
                                                           (including awake FOI) may precipitate complete upper airway obstruction. In patients with
                                                           moderate stridor, in whom intubation is considered possible (larynx visible on preop nasal
                                                           endoscopy, tumor not too large, absence of gross anatomical distortion, absence of fixed
                                                           hemilarynx), inhalational induction followed by gentle DL, or asleep FOI, are useful tech-
                                                           niques. The ENT surgeon should be present in the OR, ready to perform rigid bronchoscopy
                                                           or emergent tracheostomy. If the airway cannot be secured after 2 attempts, tracheostomy
                                                           must be performed under controlled conditions with the patient anesthetized and breathing
                                                           spontaneously. In patients with severe stridor and low probability of successful intubation, a
                                                           preliminary tracheostomy should be performed under local anesthesia without any sedation.

===== PAGE 207 =====
Tonsillectomy and/or Adenoidectomy              207

                    Induction                   Although in the majority of patients presenting for laryngectomy the location of tumor
                       (cont’d)                 is submucosal, exophytic tumor growth may be present (e.g., VC). In this circumstance,
                                               direct visualization of the passage of the ETT through the VC (DL or video laryngos-
                                                copy) is essential to eliminate or greatly diminish the risk of tumor fragmentation with
                                                seeding of the lower airway and bleeding.
                                                Other anesthetic considerations are similar to those in Neck Dissection, p. 220

                    Maintenance                See Anesthetic Considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220. After tracheostomy, a sterile
                                               reinforced ETT (6.0–7.0 mm ID) is inserted by the surgeon and connected to an anesthesia

                                                                                                                                                                 Head and Neck Surgery
                                               breathing circuit. Proper ETT placement should be confirmed by presence of ETCO2 equal

                                                                                                                                                                   Otolaryngology—
                                               bilateral breath sounds and normal airway compliance. Following tracheostomy, ↑ FiO2
                                               to at least 50% because the surgeon will continue working around the ETT, occasionally
                                               removing it from the patient’s trachea for suture application. The position of the ETT in
                                               the tracheostoma should be monitored closely to prevent the ETT from slipping into the
                                               right mainstem bronchus.

                    Emergence                  See Anesthetic Considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220.

                   For further discussion, see Intraoperative Considerations for Neck Dissections, p. 220.

                        POSTOPERATIVE
                   See Postop Considerations for Neck Dissections, p. 222.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bonner S, Taylor M: Airway obstruction in head and neck surgery. Anaesthesia 2000; 55:290–1.
                     2. Dougherty TB, Nguyen DT: Anesthetic management of the patient scheduled for head and neck cancer surgery. J Clin Anesth
                        1994; 6:74–82.
                     3. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.
                     4. Mason RA, Fielder CP: The obstructed airway in head and neck surgery. Anaesthesia 1999; 54:625–8.
                     5. See Suggested Readings for Neck Dissection, p. 222.

                   TONSILLECTOMY AND/OR ADENOIDECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The dissection for tonsillectomy is carried out with the patient supine, shoulders elevated on a
                   small pillow (Fig. 3-7). A mouth gag is inserted; and, if an adenoidectomy is being done concurrently, adenoids are
                   removed first with a curette, and the nasopharynx packed. The tonsillectomy is accomplished by firmly grasping the
                   upper pole of the tonsil and drawing it medially, allowing a mucosal incision to be made over the anterior faucial
                   pillar. The tonsil is dissected from its bed and removed. A snare may be used to snip the dissected tonsil off at the
                   lower pole. Hemostasis is secured with gauze packs and the use of electrocautery. Packs are removed from the naso-
                   pharynx and tonsillar beds before extubation. Tonsillectomy may be combined with palatopharyngoplasty in cases
                   of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) or stertorous breathing (see p. 258).
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Guillotine technique (rarely used)
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic tonsillitis and/or adenoiditis (most common); OSA; asymmetric enlargement of
                   tonsils (to r/o cancer); nasal airway obstruction; snoring; peritonsillar abscess

===== PAGE 208 =====
208   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                                               Figure 3-7. The “Rose” position for tonsillectomy.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position               “Rose” (supine, shoulder roll, head extended); surgeon at head of table (turned 90–180°)

                                 Incision               Intraoral mucosal

                                 Special                Mouth gag (McIvor)
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                 Use of armored ETT prevents compression of tube by mouth gag. Tube should be secured to
                                   considerations       lower lip in midline.

                                 Antibiotics            Amoxicillin po

                                 Surgical time          30–60 min

                                 Closing                If patient has OSA, a heightened sensitivity to narcotics and sedatives may make emergence
                                   considerations       more difficult. Avoid hypercapnia on emergence to prevent vasodilation and resultant bleeding.
                                                        Awake extubation will provide maximum airway protection.

                                 EBL                    25–200 mL. Monitor suction bottle contents and irrigation as an indication of blood loss.

                                 Postop care            Lateral position; head down; gentle suctioning

                                 Mortality              Rare

                                 Morbidity              Bleeding: 4%
                                                        Infection: 4%
                                                        Delayed bleeding: 3.2%
                                                        Aspiration: Rare
                                                        Tooth damage: Rare

                                 Pain score             4–6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               2+ yr

                                 Male:Female             1:1

===== PAGE 209 =====
Tonsillectomy and/or Adenoidectomy          209

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence               50 per 10,000 children in the United States

                     Etiology                Chronic infection; OSA (most common indication); peritonsillar abscess; snoring; cancer

                     Associated              Nonspecific
                       conditions

                                                                                                                                                          Head and Neck Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                            Otolaryngology—
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Most patients are young and otherwise healthy; however, a subset of both pediatric and adult patients may present
                   with Sx of OSA or URI. For many children, this is their first anesthetic; therefore, it is imperative to 3 family Hx for
                   anesthetic problems. Most adult and pediatric patients are discharged from the hospital on the day of surgery.

                    Airway                    In patients with a Hx of snoring or OSA, the probability of difficult mask ventilation and/or
                                              intubation may be high, 2° airway characteristics peculiar to these patients (see Introduc-
                                              tion, p. 178, and Anesthetic Considerations for Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered
                                              Breathing, p. 263). In children with short-stature syndrome, including achondroplastic
                                              dwarfism and selected cases of Down syndrome, atlantoaxial subluxation and stenosis of
                                              the spinal canal may be present, and neck extension in these patients should be avoided.

                    Respiratory               In patients presenting with Sx of acute URI (purulent sputum or nasal secretions, fever,
                                              etc.), the general recommendation is to postpone any elective procedure until symptoms
                                              have abated, usually within 7–14 d.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Dental                    The presence of chipped, loose, or broken teeth should be documented preop and the
                                              patient (or parents, if appropriate) should be informed that there is a possibility of further
                                               tooth damage/dislodgement by the mouth gag applied by the surgeon.

                    Cardiovascular            Rarely, chronic airway obstruction (e.g., OSA) with hypoxemia may → pulmonary HTN
                                              and right heart failure. Patients with Down syndrome may have concomitant CHD.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic               3 for recent aspirin use and Hx of excessive bleeding following minor trauma or tooth
                                              extraction.

                    Laboratory                CBC; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             Sedative premedication is routine (see p. B-1), but should be avoided in OSA patients and
                                              patients with Sx of upper airway obstruction. Some surgeons request preop administration
                                              of an antisialagogue to achieve a dry surgical field.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Balanced GETA is most commonly used in adults. (For pediatric anesthetic considerations,
                   see p. 964.) Adequate muscle relaxation is an essential surgical requirement: it facilitates surgical exposure and pre-
                   vents patient from swallowing. Continuous control and protection of the airway is another major objective, along
                   with smooth emergence from anesthesia and prevention of early postop laryngospasm. Specific airway consider-
                   ations include the possibility of difficult mask ventilation and/or difficult intubation 2° large tonsils and ↓ pharyngeal
                   space, as well as the possibility of intraop obstruction of the ETT with the mouth gag placed by the surgeon.

                    Induction                 An intravenous induction with propofol (2 mg/kg) and fentanyl (2–3 mcg/kg) is suit-
                                              able for the majority of patients. If difficulty with mask ventilation is encountered, an oral
                                              airway is preferred to a nasal airway, 2° the possibility of trauma to the hypertrophied
                                              adenoid tissue and the resultant brisk bleeding. Patients with peritonsillar abscess may

===== PAGE 210 =====
210   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Induction                have trismus, which usually resolves after induction of anesthesia and administration of a
                                   (cont’d)              muscle relaxant.
                                                         Great care should be exercised with introduction and manipulation of laryngoscope blade
                                                         to avoid bleeding 2° inadvertent trauma to the enlarged tonsils, and to prevent soiling of
                                                         the airway in patients with a peritonsillar abscess. The lightwand technique of tracheal
                                                         intubation should be used with caution or avoided in these patients. The use of a small (6.0
                                                         mm ID) reinforced ETT is preferred over an oral RAE ETT because of better resistance to
                                                         kinking/obstruction by the mouth gag.
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                         The use of a FLMA can safely protect the airway during adenotonsillectomy and reduce
    Otolaryngology—

                                                         the incidence of postextubation complications in adults and children. Its use for this pro-
                                                         cedure, however, has not become popular in the United States.

                                Maintenance              Opening of a mouth gag and the tonsillectomy itself constitute powerful noxious stimuli;
                                                         therefore, an adequate depth of anesthesia must be maintained. It is essential to verify the ETT
                                                         position before and after Boyle-Davis or McIvor mouth gag application (e.g., chest move-
                                                         ment, bilateral and equal breath sounds, and nomal PIP) since the ETT may be obstructed,
                                                         dislodged, kinked, or inadvertently advanced into a mainstem bronchus, or the patient’s tra-
                                                         chea can be prematurely extubated when the mouth gag is repositioned/removed. Moderate
                                                         ↓ BP is desirable but not obligatory; and judicious use of vasoactive drugs (see Introduction,
                                                         p. 178) is preferred to deep levels of anesthesia 2° short duration of the procedure.
                                                         Low-dose remifentanil infusion (see Introduction, p. 178) as part of either balanced or
                                                         TIVA technique will provide superior hemodynamic stability and facilitate smooth emer-
                                                         gence from anesthesia. For a balanced inhalational technique, desflurane and sevoflurane
                                                         are the preferred agents for these short surgical procedures. Isoflurane may be favored in
                                                         pediatric patients 2° ↓ agitation on emergence.
                                                         The mouth gag may be repositioned several times during the procedure and is removed
                                                         only at the end of the case. Vigorous patient movement while the mouth gag is hooked on
                                                         the Mayo stand may cause C-spine injury; thus, neuromuscular blockade should usually be
                                                         maintained until the end of the surgery.
                                                         Prevention of PONV is of major importance. If a throat pack is not used by the surgeon,
                                                         the patient’s stomach should be suctioned at the end of the case, and further gastric emp-
                                                         tying may be facilitated by administration of metoclopromide (1–2 mg/kg up to 20 mg
                                                         iv). Administration of 5-HT3 blockers (e.g., ondansetron 0.1 mg/kg up to 4 mg iv), with
                                                         or without steroids (e.g., dexamethasone 4–10 mg iv), will usually provide adequate anti-
                                                         emetic prophylaxis.

                                Emergence                Removal of a throat pack (if used by the surgeon) should be verified before extubation.
                                                         Care must be exercised while suctioning the oropharynx to avoid bleeding. The use of the
                                                         rubber-tipped vs. Yankauer tip suction catheter may be preferred. Extubation should be
                                                         smooth and performed after the patient is able to follow commands because this usually
                                                         signifies return of protective airway reflexes.
                                                         If extubation is to be performed at deeper levels of anesthesia (e.g., in small children), the
                                                         patient should be placed in the lateral decubitus, head-down position (“tonsillar position”)
                                                         to protect the airway from soiling 2° postop bleeding or aspiration of gastric contents.
                                                         The patient should remain in this position until fully awake. This method of extubation is
                                                         time and labor consuming, requires adequate depth of anesthesia to prevent postextuba-
                                                         tion laryngospasm, and does not prevent postextubation upper airway obstruction. Careful
                                                         attention is required to protect patient’s pressure points and to prevent the patient from
                                                         rolling supine. Furthermore, with the head-down position, venous pressure in the surgi-
                                                         cal wound is increased with the possibility of provoking postop bleeding. This method of
                                                         extubation cannot be advocated for routine use in adults.

                                Blood and fluid          IV: 18 ga × 1 (adult)                    Blood loss is typically minimal. Adequate hydration
                                   requirements          20 ga × 1 (child)                        should continue in the immediate postop period.
                                                         NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h (adult)

                                Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)

===== PAGE 211 =====
Tonsillectomy and/or Adenoidectomy             211

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                 See Anesthetic Considerations for Panendoscopy,
                                               3 eyes                                    p. 184.

                    Complications              ETT obstruction dislodgement              ETTs of different sizes should be readily available.
                                               Bleeding                                  Blood loss sometimes may be difficult to assess 2°
                                                                                         drainage into stomach, especially if a throat pack is
                                                                                         not used. Careful observation of suction canisters and
                                                                                         close communication with the surgeon are essential.

                                                                                                                                                                Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                  Otolaryngology—
                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Retention of throat pack                  Manifested by immediate symptoms of upper
                                                                                         airway obstruction. Under direct laryngoscopy,
                                                                                         remove pack with Magill forceps.
                                               Laryngospasm                               A relatively common complication, particularly in
                                                                                          the pediatric population. Rx: 100% O2 via mask ven-
                                                                                          tilation with jaw thrust and CPAP. Rapid-sequence
                                                                                          induction (RSI) and direct laryngoscopy/intubation
                                                                                          for persistent laryngospasm.
                                               Bleeding tonsil                            Bleeding usually occurs at a slow pace; large vol-
                                                                                          umes of blood may be swallowed, and hypovolemia
                                                                                          may occur before any bleeding is detected. Frequent
                                                                                          swallowing should alert to the possibility of ongoing
                                                                                          hemorrhage. ET intubation (RSI) may prove diffi-
                                                                                          cult due to poor visualization secondary to bleed-
                                                                                          ing (effective suction must always be available)
                                                                                          and upper airway edema. (See Pediatric section on
                                                                                          Anesthesia for Tonsillectomy, p. 964.)
                                               Postobstructive (negative pressure)         POPE is a rare complication; however, it may occur
                                               pulmonary edema (POPE)                      in patients with preexisting symptoms of severe
                                                                                           upper airway obstruction. Although most cases
                                                                                           resolve spontaneously, some patients may require
                                                                                           reintubation and postop ventilatory support.

                    Pain                       See p. C-1                                Adult tonsillectomy is a painful procedure; howev-
                      management                                                         er, most patients are discharged home unless unable
                                                                                         to sustain po intake. Fentanyl is the preferred PACU
                                                                                         drug, but the addition of morphine or Dilaudid may
                                                                                         be necessary in some patients.

                    Tests                      Hct                                       If blood loss is suspected

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Acevedo JL, Shah RK, Brietzke SE: Systematic review of complications of tonsillotomy versus tonsillectomy. Otolaryngol
                        Head Neck Surg 2012; 146(6):871–9.
                     2. Brimacombe JR, Keller C, Gunkel AR, et al: The influence of the tonsilar gag on efficacy of seal, anatomic position, airway
                        patency, and airway protection with the flexible laryngeal mask airway: a randomized, cross-over study on fresh adult
                        cadavers. Anesth Analg 1999; 89:181–6.
                     3. Davis L, Cook-Sather SD, Schreiner MS: Lighted stylet tracheal intubation: a review. Anesth Analg 2000; 90:745–56.
                     4. Dougherty TB: The difficult airway in conventional head and neck surgery. In: Benumof JL, ed. Airway Management:
                        Principles and Practice. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996, 686–97.
                     5. Ebert TJ, Robinson BJ, Uhrich TD, et al: Recovery from sevoflurane anesthesia. A comparison to isoflurane and propofol
                        anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1998; 89:1524–31.
                     6. Sunkhani R, Pappas AL, Lurie J, et al: Ondansetron and dolasetron provide equivalent postoperative vomiting control after
                        ambulatory tonsillectomy in dexamethasone-pretreated children. Anesth Analg 2002; 95:1230–5.
                     7. Webster AC, Morley-Forster PK, Dain S, et al: Anaesthesia for adenotonsillectomy: a comparison between tracheal intubation
                        and the armored laryngeal mask airway. Can J Anesth 1993; 40:1171–7.

===== PAGE 212 =====
212   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                GLOSSECTOMY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Glossectomy, either partial or total, is performed for neoplastic lesions of the tongue. During this
                                procedure, nasal intubation is helpful, but not mandatory. Complete muscle relaxation is necessary. Addition-
                                ally, a drying agent, such as scopolamine or glycopyrrolate, helps reduce oral secretions and facilitates surgery.
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                A side-biting or Dingman mouth gag is used to gain adequate surgical exposure. The lesion is resected with
    Otolaryngology—

                                electrocautery and usually can be closed primarily. Depending on the extent of resection, and location on the
                                tongue, a tracheostomy may be indicated; or oral intubation alone may suffice for a period of 24–48 h. If neither
                                is done, a short course of steroids helps reduce the lingual edema. A NG tube is placed for postop feeding. A
                                total glossectomy is performed in similar fashion, but frequently is combined with a laryngectomy because of
                                ensuing aspiration.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Glossectomy can be done with a neck dissection or mandibulectomy and
                                (on occasion) also can be combined with a total laryngectomy.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Neoplastic disease of the tongue or adjacent structures (e.g., alveolus, floor of mouth) with
                                involvement of the tongue.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Partial                                       Total

                                 Position                Supine                                        ⇐

                                 Incision                Intraoral                                     ⇐ + suprahyoid approach/neck approach

                                 Special                 Dingman mouth gag                             ⇐
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Hypotensive anesthesia                        ⇐
                                   considerations        Nasal intubation                              ⇐
                                                         Postop tracheostomy                           ⇐ (required)
                                                         Steroids, if tracheostomy not performed.

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g, metronidazole 500 mg           ⇐

                                 Surgical time           30 min–1 h                                    2–4 h

                                 Closing                 Usually primary closure. May keep patient     Flap repair required; laryngeal suspension
                                   considerations        intubated 24–48 h if minimal tongue edema     usually required. Tracheostomy mandatory
                                                         expected.                                     postop.

                                 EBL                     50–100 mL                                     200–400 mL

                                 Postop care             Intubated 24–48 h                             Tracheostomy care

                                 Mortality               < 1%                                          ⇐

                                 Morbidity               Bleeding                                      Aspiration
                                                         Infection                                     Bleeding
                                                         Aspiration                                    Infection

                                 Pain score              1–2                                           2–4

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                Adults

                                 Male:Female              3:1

                                 Incidence                Uncommon

===== PAGE 213 =====
Glossectomy        213

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Etiology                   Neoplasia

                     Associated conditions      Nonspecific

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                Head and Neck Surgery
                        PREOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                                  Otolaryngology—
                   For preop considerations, see Preoperative Considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220

                    Airway                  Thorough airway assessment is mandatory. Nasal intubation may or may not be required, depend-
                                            ing on location of tumor (side vs. base of tongue [BOT]) and surgeon’s preference (inquire preop).

                    Premedication           Standard. (see p. B-1) Preop administration of antisialagogue (e.g., glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg iv)
                                            may improve operating conditions—check with the surgeon.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Complete muscle relaxation is an essential surgical requirement. For partial glossectomy,
                   smooth extubation is desirable but not mandatory unless skin graft was used for closure (graft hematomas are the primary
                   cause of skin graft failure). Intraop infiltration with a local anesthetic effectively supplements intraop and postop analgesia.

                    Induction                  With a normal airway and submucosal location of tumor on the side of the tongue, standard
                                               induction (p. B-2) is appropriate. With mobile, fungating BOT tumors inhalational induc-
                                               tion with subsequent DL or video laryngoscopy (VL) may be a safer approach to avoid the
                                               risk of upper airway obstruction. Similar to the considerations for laryngectomy (see Anes-
                                               thetic Considerations for Laryngectomy, p. 206), direct visualization of the passage of the
                                               ETT through the VC (DL or VL) is essential, to reduce the risk of tumor fragmentation with
                                               seeding of the lower airway, or bleeding. Among the video laryngoscopes, the Pentax Airway
                                               ScopeTM (AWS) is beneficial for use in BOT pathology, as the blade lodges under the epi-
                                               glottis. Large immobile tumors may make ET intubation by conventional means extremely
                                               difficult or impossible. Awake nasal FOI may be the technique of choice in these cases.
                                               Transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is gaining popularity for many BOT operations, as well
                                               as for such procedures as supraglottic laryngectomy. Orotracheal intubation with a small
                                               size (6.0 mm ID) wire-reinforced ETT is ususallly sufficient, but nasotracheal intubation
                                               may be required by the surgeon. Instrumentation around the patient’s face makes immedi-
                                               ate access to the airway impossible, and the ETT must be well secured; suturing ETT in
                                               place has been advocated. Adequate muscle relaxation and absence of patient’s swallow-
                                               ing must be meticulously observed. Administration of glycopyrrolate (0.1–0.4 mg iv) may
                                               improve the surgical field.

                    Maintenance                During a partial glossectomy, surgical closure is quick, and short-acting inhalational
                                               agents (desflurane, sevoflurane) may be favored; TIVA may also be employed. ↓ BP (see
                                               Introduction, p. 178), although desirable, is not mandatory for partial glossectomy. If tra-
                                               cheostomy is performed as part of the planned procedure, the usual considerations apply
                                               (see Anesthetic Considerations for Laryngectomy, p. 206, and Tracheostomy, p. 191).

                    Emergence                  With prolonged procedures, especially involving BOT tumors, it is prudent to assess the
                                               degree of upper airway edema prior to extubation (it may be impossible to reintubate the
                                               patient if postextubation upper airway obstruction occurs). Rapid recovery with full return
                                               of protective airway reflexes is essential in patients after partial glossectomy.

                    Complications              Vagal reflexes: ↓ HR, ↓ BP, mediated by sur-        Rare. Rx: notify surgeon; deepen anes-
                                               gical manipulation at the base of the tongue        thetic; iv atropine (0.4 mg).

                   For further discussion, see Intraoperative Considerations for Neck Dissection, p. 220.

===== PAGE 214 =====
214   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications               Postop airway obstruction                  May occur 2° ↑ airway edema; emergent trache-
                                                                                                        ostomy may be required. Prophylactic intraop ste-
                                                                                                        roids are beneficial.

                                 Pain                        PCA (p. C-3)
                                   management                Parenteral opiates (p. C-3)
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                For further discussion, see Neck Dissection, p. 218.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Doughrty TB, Nguyen DT: Anesthetic management of the patient scheduled for head and neck cancer surgery. J Clin Anesth
                                     1994; 6:74–82.
                                  2. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                                     Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.

                                MAXILLECTOMY and Orbit Exenteration
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Transfacial approaches to the paranasal sinuses may also include a maxillectomy or orbital exentera-
                                tion or both. In an orbital exenteration the contents of the orbit are removed, including the eyeball and its attached
                                extraocular muscles posterior toward the conus. This can be done via an incision that is made around the upper and
                                lower eyelashes, occasionally with an extension that includes a limited incision for an external ethmoidectomy; no
                                lateral rhinotomy incision is needed. If the eyelid skin is not involved by tumor it is preserved other than the eye-
                                lashes and lid margins. Bradycardia may occur with dissection near the optic nerve.
                                A maxillectomy may be done with the orbit exenteration. If the palate is to be preserved, the incision is the same
                                because access to the superior maxilla is provided by the exenteration. If the orbit is to be preserved, but the hemipal-
                                 ate is to be resected, then the resection can often be done fully through intraoral incisions. For example, if the ante-
                                 rior palate is to be resected, the approach is essentially the same as the Caldwell-Luc. If the anterior maxilla is to be
                                 preserved, but the posterior maxillary alveolar ridge is to be resected (as for a tumor involving the alveolar ridge and
                                 extending into the maxillary sinus), then the resection of the alveolar ridge usually provides adequate access for the
                                 complete resection. If necessary, either a transfacial incision, or endoscopic equipment may be used to supplement
                                 the access. Rarely is a full Weber-Ferguson incision (that involves an ethmoidectomy incision, lateral rhinotomy inci-
                                 son, and lip splitting incision) necessary. Osteotomies are generally made with power equipment, though osteotomes
                                 and rongeurs may at times be adequate.
                                Reconstruction of palate defects are generally done with an obdurator with a split thickness skin graft placed intraop
                                on exposed soft tissue. There are a number of options to reconstruct orbit defects depending on whether skin was also
                                resected. These options include the pericranial-galeal flap discussed for anterior cranial base surgery, a free myogenous
                                flap such as the rectus abdominus, covered with a skin graft (as the subcutaneous fat associated with using abdominal
                                skin generally is too bulky for this site), or if there is extensive skin loss, then a radial free flap or lateral thigh free flap.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Maxillectomy                                                     Orbital Resection

                                 Position                   Head raised 30°, back raised (reduces bleeding)                  ⇐

                                 Incision                   Same as external sinus approach; combinable with                 Eyelash incision; if necessary add
                                                            intraoral incisions.                                             external ethmoidectomy

===== PAGE 215 =====
Maxillectomy and Orbit Exenteration       215

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                          Maxillectomy                                               Orbital Resection

                     Special              Paranasal sinus set; headlight                             ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique               Nasal packing                                              ⇐; see reconstruction
                       considerations

                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                     Antibiotics          Cefazolin 1 g + metronidazole 500 mg; or clindamycin       Cefazolin 1 g

                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                                          600 mg

                     Surgical time        2–4 h                                                      1.5–3 h

                     EBL                  100–300 mL                                                 25–100 mL

                     Postop care          Same as endoscopic surgery                                 Reconstruction-dependent

                     Mortality            Rare                                                       Very rare

                     Morbidity            Bleeding: 5%                                               ⇐
                                          Transient Diplopia: 5%
                                          Infection: 5%                                              ⇐

                     Pain score           2–3 if no oral entry; 4–6 if palate                        2–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range            50–70                                          40–80

                     Male:Female          3:1                                            2:1

                     Incidence            Common                                         ⇐

                     Etiology             Malignant tumors, selected benign tumors       Malignancies, rare benign proceses

                     Associated           Tobacco, alcohol, rare others                  ⇐
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Typically, these patients are older males who may have concomitant cardiopulmonary disease. Their nutritional
                   status is not usually affected.

                    Airway                 For patients presenting for maxillectomy, careful inspection is warranted, although it is un-
                                           likely that the disease process will → airway compromise. With large tumors, space avail-
                                           able for laryngoscope blade manipulation may be somewhat decreased. XRT typically is
                                           done postop.

                    Cardiovascular         Preop evaluation should focus on the patient’s suitability for controlled ↓ BP: may be con-
                                           traindicated in patients with advanced cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disease.
                                           Tests: ECG; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory             Tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication          Standard premedication (p. B-1)

===== PAGE 216 =====
216   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. Bifrontal craniotomy may be required if the disease process extends into the para-
                                nasal sinuses, dura, and anterior skull base. These procedures can be lengthy and very stimulating; the use of potent
                                opioids (see Introduction, p. 178) is beneficial. The essential surgical requirement is ↓ bleeding into the field. Intraop
                                hemorrhage may occasionally be brisk and substantial (in excess of 500 cc) during maxillectomy. Maintaining ad-
                                equate circulating volume is crucial. Promotion of rapid awakening with full return of protective airway reflexes
                                presents additional challenges to the anesthesiologist.
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                Induction                  An opioid-based technique, as outlined previously (see Introduction, p. 178). Any iv induc-
    Otolaryngology—

                                                           tion agent can be safely used; ↓ dose in elderly and patients with significant cardiac disease.
                                                           Oral tracheal intubation is performed with a small (6.0 mm ID) reinforced ETT to facilitate
                                                           surgical manipulation inside patient’s mouth. With large tumors, especially on the right
                                                           side, care is necessary when performing DL to avoid bleeding. ETT should be secured over
                                                           the chin. Placement of a small-diameter esophageal temperature probe will not interfere
                                                           with the surgical field.

                                Maintenance                Controlled hypotension is often requested. A combination of opioid (e.g., remifen
                                                           tanil) or sufentanil infusion with a potent, quickly titratable inhalational agent (e.g.,
                                                           desflurane), supplemented with iv b-blockers, if required, is usually sufficient. After
                                                           the specimen has been removed, surgical stimulation decreases, and the inhalational
                                                           anesthetic should be significantly reduced to promote rapid awakening.

                                Emergence                  The patients are routinely extubated, even after extended procedures. The stomach should
                                                           be suctioned at the end of the case (throat pack is removed only by the surgeon to facilitate
                                                           placement of a dental prosthesis). Stomach emptying should be facilitated by administra-
                                                           tion of iv metoclopromide (10–20 mg). Nasal passages may be packed → obligate mouth
                                                           breathing; oropharynx must be suctioned thoroughly and carefully. No dressing is applied
                                                           postop. Washing blood from the patient’s face is frequently accompanied by vigorous
                                                           movement of the patient’s head and ETT. If a sufficient dose of opioids has been used, the
                                                           patient will tolerate this well without coughing/gagging/straining, while breathing sponta-
                                                           neously. Extubation must be smooth, with full return of protective airway reflexes. Hemop-
                                                           tysis may occur after extubation, and the patient’s mouth should be promptly covered with
                                                           an O2 mask, to avoid contamination.

                                Blood and fluid            IV: 16 ga × 1                          Blood loss minimal-to-severe. It can be sudden and
                                   requirements            LR @ 5–7 cc/kg/h                       substantial.

                                Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)             A-line monitoring is warranted for anterior cranial
                                                           ± Arterial line                        base surgery or in patients with significant cardiovas-
                                                                                                  cular disease.

                                Positioning                Head elevated 20–30°
                                                           Table may be turned 90–180°.
                                                           3 and pad pressure points
                                                           3 eyes

                                Complications              VAE                                    A risk of air embolism, with surgery on the paranasal
                                                                                                  sinuses, should be kept in mind.
                                                           Dysrhythmias                           Dysrhythmias may occur 2° significant surgical
                                                                                                  stimulation and breakthrough adrenergic responses.
                                                           Hypotension                            ↓ BP may be sudden 2° brisk blood loss.
                                                           ↓↓ HR                                  Trigeminocardiac reflex may occur during intraop-
                                                                                                  erative manipulation of the trigeminal nerve.
                                                           Brain edema                            Careful fluid management, not to promote/exac-
                                                                                                  erbate brain edema associated with the bifrontal
                                                                                                  craniotomy.

===== PAGE 217 =====
Composite Resection with Marginal or Segmental Mandibulectomy (and Neck Dissection)                          217

                        POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications              Occult postop bleeding                   Postop bleeding may cause the patient to swallow
                                                                                        large quantities of blood, which represents an aspira-
                                                                                        tion risk and may manifest as ↓ BP.
                                               Pneumocephalus                           Persistent pneumocephalus (if the paranasal sinuses
                                                                                        were opened) with symptoms of increased ICP.

                    Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                             Pain is moderate

                                                                                                                                                                 Head and Neck Surgery
                      management               Parenteral opioids (p. C-1)

                                                                                                                                                                   Otolaryngology—
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Dougherty TB, Nguyen DT: Anesthetic management of the patient scheduled for head and neck cancer surgery. J Clin Anesth
                        1994; 6:74–82.
                     2. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.

                   Composite resection with marginal or
                   segmental mandibulectomy (and neck
                   dissection)
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A composite resection means that part of the mandibular alveolar ridge is resected, often along with
                   the floor of mouth and a part of the tongue, generally for advanced squamous cell carcinoma, though occasionally
                   for osteoradionecrosis following complications of prior irradiation or for other malignancies such as osteosarcoma.
                   In a marginal mandibulectomy, bone inferior to the plane of the inferior alveolar nerve (which runs just below
                   the teeth and provides dental innervation and cutaneous sensation to the lower lip and chin) is preserved. In a
                   segmental mandibulectomy, a through-and-through segment of bone is removed such that there is a bone gap. A
                   marginal mandibulectomy may at times be reconstructed with intraoral advancement flaps in an edentulous patient,
                   or a pectoralis major myocutaneous flap or radial free flap may be indicated. A segmental resection requires either
                   bone replacement, such as fibula free flap, or a titanium bridging bar beneath a pectoralis major myocutaneous flap.
                   A composite resection generally requires a tracheostomy although an intraoral marginal mandibulectomy repaired
                   locally may allow a 2–3 d intubation, thereby avoiding tracheostomy.

                     ■■ Summary of Procedures
                                              Composite Resection (often with MRND)             . . . and Free Flap

                     Position                  Supine, head extended and turned to              ⇐ + Preparation of 2nd sterile site, such as
                                              opposite side                                    arm or leg; two surgical teams

                     Incision                 Intraoral and neck                                ⇐ and donor site

                     Special                  Depends on technique used; headlights, suc-       Surgeon-specific, but point cautery, mouth
                       Instrumentation        tion or suction cautery, mouth gag                gag, and plastic bilateral cheek retractor
                                                                                                common

                     Unique                   Armored ETT converted to, or initial,             Dependent on 2nd site
                       Considerations         tracheostomy

                     Antibiotics              Common is ampicillin or cefazolin 1 g [±          ⇐
                                              metronidazole 500 mg]; or clindamycin 600 mg

===== PAGE 218 =====
218   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ Summary of Procedures (cont’d)
                                                          Composite Resection (often with MRND)         . . . and Free Flap

                                 Surgical time            6–8 h                                         ⇐ Add 3–6 h

                                 EBL                      200–400 mL; transfusions uncommon             ⇐ ; little additional loss

                                 Postop care              Drain management, monitor for wound           ⇐ + ICU for flap surveillance
                                                          breakdown
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 Mortality                <1%                                           ⇐

                                 Morbidity                Bleeding: < 4%                                ⇐
                                                          Infection ± fistula: < 10%                    Flap failure requiring return to OR
                                                          DVT/PE: < 1%                                  < 5%
                                                          Medical: MI < 1%                              Donor site morbidity
                                                          Pneumonia: < 3%

                                 Pain Score               4–8                                           ⇐

                                 ■■ Patient population characteristics
                                 Age range                40–70, occasionally older and younger                              ⇐

                                 Male:Female              3:1                                                                ⇐

                                 Incidence                Common                                                             ⇐

                                 Etiology                 SCC and other malignancy                                           ⇐

                                 Associated               Smoking and alcohol; COPD, atherosclerostic heart disease          ⇐
                                   conditions

                                Neck dissection
                                Description: The goal of a neck dissection is a lymphadenectomy either to remove known cervical metastases
                                (an N+ neck) or as a staging procedure in a patient apparently without clinically or radiologically involved nodes
                                (an N0 neck) but at significant risk nevertheless. The most common indication by far is in the management of
                                squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck. For the purpose of discussing a neck dissection, the neck
                                can be divided into five levels. Level 1 is the tissue that is inferior to the mandible, anterior to the posterior belly
                                of the digastric muscle, and superior to the hyoid bone, including the submental triangle between the left and
                                right anterior belly of the digastric muscles. The most prominent structure in level 1 is the submandibular gland.
                                Level 2 through 4 includes the tissue beneath and anterior to the sterncleidomastoid muscle (SCM): level 2 is
                                superior to the hyoid bone, level 3 between the hyoid and cricoid bone, and level 4 is inferior to the cricoid. Level
                                5 contains the tissue between the posterior edge of the SCM and the anterior edge of the trapezius muscle.
                                There are several different kinds of neck dissection, depending on which levels are removed:
                                          Radical neck dissection (RND) or modified radical neck dissection (MRND): this involves the re-
                                      (a) 
                                          moval of levels 1–5. Except in markedly advanced disease, seldom is a RND (which removes the internal
                                          jugular vein, SCM, and accessory (XI) nerve) necessary. A MRND preserves one or more of those three
                                          structures, generally at least the XI nerve. The term functional neck dissection is sometimes used to indi-
                                          cate preservation of all three of these three structures. A MRND (or RND) is generally done when there
                                          is N+ disease. Similar surgery may also be necessary to remove extensive tumors other than SCC, such as
                                          a sarcoma or paraganglioma. An extended neck dissection involves removal of additional tissue, such as
                                          muscles deep to the superficial layer of the deep cervical fascia. MRND is a common additional procedure
                                          done for an N+ neck at the time of removal of a primary SCC of the head and neck.

===== PAGE 219 =====
Neck Dissection      219

                         (b) Selective neck dissection (SND) removes less than all five levels, generally for N0 disease when adjacent
                              surgery is planned or in an effort to ascertain there is no histologically demonstrable disease, thereby
                              avoiding postop irradiation to the primary site and neck. The two most common types of SND are
                               i. Supraomohyoid neck dissection (SOHND): This removes levels 1–3, generally in a patient with an oral cav-
                                   ity SCC with a depth of > 3.5- to 5-mm at risk for nodal involvement despite a clinically N0 neck.
                              ii. Lateral neck dissection: Removes levels 2–4, generally in N0 patient with glottic or supraglottic carci-
                                   noma in whom, again, it is hoped that postop XRT may be avoided.

                     ■■ Summary of Procedures

                                                                                                                                                          Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                            Otolaryngology—
                                             MRND (or RND)                                    SOHND

                     Position                Supine, head extended and turned to opposite     ⇐
                                             side; table 90° or 180°.

                     Incision                Common incisions include a reverse hockey        ~7 cm RSTL (resting skin tension line) incision
                                             (submandibular RSTL to mastoid tip then          3 cm inferior to the mandible, beginning
                                             extended inferiorly); utility/hockey; superior   anterior to SCM extending toward the mentum.
                                             and inferior neck RSTL (McFee).

                     Special                 Major head & neck set; headlights                ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Avoid paralysis until after marginal mandibular  ⇐
                       considerations        nerve and XI identified. If bilateral, larnygeal
                                             edema may occur; dissection near carotid body
                                             and vagus may produce transient bradycardia.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g [and metronidazole 500 mg          ⇐
                                             if UADT entry planned]; or clindamycin 600 mg

                     Surgical time           2–4 h                                            1.5 h

                     EBL                     50–250 mL; transfusions rarely indicated         ⇐

                     Postop care             Drain management                                 ⇐

                     Mortality               < 1%                                             ⇐

                     Morbidity               Unanticipated neuropathy (e.g., XII, X, VII      ⇐
                                                marginal branch, recurrent laryngeal nerve
                                                and phrenic nerve) < 1%;
                                             Chyle leak < 2%
                                             Hematoma < 4%
                                             Infection < 5%
                                             DVT/PE ~1%
                                             XI weakness expected
                                             Shoulder pain ~20%

                     Pain Score              4–8                                              2–4

                     ■■ Patient population characteristics
                     Age range               40–80, occasionally older and younger            ⇐

                     Male:Female             3:1                                              ⇐

                     Incidence               Common                                           ⇐

                     Etiology                1° site SCC; Smoking and alcohol                 ⇐

                     Associated              COPD, atherosclerostic heart disease             ⇐
                       conditions

===== PAGE 220 =====
220   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Many of these patients are older males with a long Hx of heavy smoking and ETOH use and have a high incidence of
                                associated cardiopulmonary diseases. Nutritional status of the patients may be poor and should be optimized before
                                surgery. Neck dissections are lengthy, but are rarely associated with significant blood loss, except in patients who
                                have undergone radiation therapy.
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                Airway                    Airway management may be difficult 2° limited head and neck mobility, ↓ mouth opening,
                                                          distorted airway, ↓ pharyngeal space and fixation of tissues 2° tumor expansion, radiation
                                                          fibrosis or previous surgeries.
                                                          Backup plans for airway management are essential, and a review of preop findings on indi-
                                                          rect laryngoscopy and/or CT scan with the surgeon may be helpful in planning a strategy
                                                          for intubation. If a difficult intubation is foreseen, awake FOI may be the technique of
                                                          choice (see Anesthetic Considerations for Laryngectomy, p. 206). Emergent tracheostomy
                                                          may technically be very difficult 2° advanced disease, neck edema, previous surgeries and
                                                          distorted anatomy.

                                Respiratory               High incidence of chronic bronchitis and COPD.
                                                          Tests: CXR; preop ABG in patients with advanced COPD, CO2 retention and O2-
                                                          dependence. Flow-volume loops may be helpful in patients with symptoms of partial air-
                                                          way obstruction.

                                Cardiovascular            Careful assessment of cardiac risk factors and functional status. Documenting
                                                          a symptomatic neck bruits or existing carotid artery stenosis, as well as any Sx of com-
                                                          promised cerebral circulation is important (see Emergence, below). HTN must be
                                                          controlled preop especially in patients presenting for radical neck dissection and flap
                                                          reconstruction. Uncontrolled HTN in these patients carries additional risk of exag-
                                                          gerated hemodynamic responses postop 2° surgical denervation of the carotid sinus
                                                          (discussed below).
                                                          Tests: ECG. Consider carotid ultrasound, cardiac stress testing and imaging studies if
                                                           indicated from H&P.

                                Neurologic                See Preoperative Considerations for Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy, p. 184.
                                                          Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Hematologic               In cases of malignancy or chronic disease, anemia or coagulopathies may be present.
                                                          Tests: CBC, coagulation studies

                                Laboratory                LFTs, electrolytes, albumin, BUN and creatinine; other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication             Standard premedication (p. B-1). Avoid premedication in patients with symptoms of par-
                                                          tial airway obstruction.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: The anesthetic considerations for composite resection and neck dissection are similar.
                                The use of deep and superficial cervical plexus blocks, as well as cervical epidural anesthesia, either alone or in
                                combination with light GETA, has been described in the literature, but used rarely. GETA is virtually universally em-
                                ployed. The specific surgical requirements for the anesthetic technique are outlined above (see Introduction, p. 178).
                                Straining or coughing/gagging on the ETT during emergence from anesthesia is particularly undesirable in neck
                                surgery 2° easily provoked bleeding and swelling at the surgical site. Smooth emergence from anesthesia is essential.
                                Use of a FLMA in major cancer neck surgery is dubious.

                                Induction                 Choice of induction will depend on the degree of the airway compromise and anatomi-
                                                          cal location of any obstructing lesion. The airway may need to be secured asleep, with
                                                          the patient breathing spontaneously, awake (FOI), or a tracheostomy may need to be

===== PAGE 221 =====
Neck Dissection       221

                    Induction          performed preinduction. In patients with uncompromised airways, potent opioids (see
                       (cont’d)        Introduction, p. 178) can be safely used for induction. The induction dose of a hypnotic
                                       agent frequently must be reduced because of the patients’ age, preexisting medical con-
                                       ditions, and hypoalbuminemia.

                    Maintenance        Maintaining moderate ↓ BP (see Introduction, p. 178) and aggressive treatment of ↑ BP are
                                       necessary. In patients with flap reconstruction, ↑ BP may overcome vasospasm, dislodging
                                       a hemostatic blood clot or poorly tied ligature → formation of a flap hematoma. Muscle
                                       relaxation is usually avoided to facilitate identification of nerves.

                                                                                                                                                 Head and Neck Surgery
                                       All inspired gases should be humidified to minimize ↓ T° and propensity for mu-

                                                                                                                                                   Otolaryngology—
                                       cous plugging in this patient population. However, the use of low gas flows is preferred
                                       to use of an in-circuit humidifier. Venous air embolism (VAE) during radical neck sur-
                                       gery occurs very rarely; maintaining adequate intravascular volume and PPV will fur-
                                       ther ↓ the incidence of this complication. If a large collection of air bubbles is observed
                                       by the surgeon in the internal jugular vein, the anesthesiologist should be notified im-
                                       mediately; these bubbles can be safely aspirated with a fine needle by the surgeon.
                                       Vagal reflexes from the carotid sinus may cause ↓ HR and ↓ BP. Transient prolonga-
                                       tion of the QT interval during right radical neck dissection has been described and
                                       may potentially progress to ventricular arrhythmias and even cardiac arrest. Trache-
                                       ostomy can be performed as part of the radical neck dissection with implications for
                                       anesthesia management (see Anesthetic Considerations for Tracheostomy, p. 191).

                    Emergence          If airway compromise is present preop, but tracheostomy was not performed, consider
                                       staged extubation over an airway exchange catheter to facilitate possible reintubation.
                                       The majority of patients with microvascular flap reconstruction will have a tracheostomy
                                       placed and could be awakened or continued on overnight ventilatory support in the ICU.
                                       Awakening the patient in the OR may help to exclude possible intraop embolic stroke
                                       before their transfer to the PACU or ICU.
                                       Administration of iv labetalol before awakening may prevent rebound hypertension. Up to
                                       10% of patients may develop a sustained hypertensive response postop, probably 2° dener-
                                       vation of the carotid sinus; Rx aggressively 2° ↑ risk of stroke.

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 16(18) ga x 1                     Blood loss is typically gradual. Sudden blood loss
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 5–7mL/kg/h                    resulting from injury to the internal jugular vein or
                                       Fluid warmer                          carotid artery can be surgically controlled.
                                       ± humidifier

                    Control of blood   Surgical hemostasis                  Continue aggressive Rx of ↑ BP in the PACU.
                      loss             Deliberate ↓ BP

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (p. B-1)            A line may be indicated for patients with preexisting
                                       ± Arterial line                       severe cardiac and pulmonary disease, chronic renal
                                       ± CVP line                            insufficiency (CRI), symptoms of cerebrovascular in-
                                       Foley catheter                        sufficiency, location of tumor near the carotid artery,
                                                                             or in patients presenting for lengthy procedures, in-
                                                                             cluding microvascular flap reconstruction. CVP mon-
                                                                             itoring may be warranted in severely malnourished
                                                                             patients, patients with severe COPD, patients with
                                                                             CRI and patients presenting for microvascular flap
                                                                             reconstruction.

                    Positioning        Usually supine, head elevated 30°
                                       Table turned 180°
                                       3 and pad pressure points
                                       3 eyes

                    Complications      Vagal reflexes: ↓ HR and ↓ BP         2° carotid sinus stimulation; Rx: stop surgery; lido
                                                                             caine infiltration of the carotid sinus by the surgeon;
                                                                             iv atropine.

===== PAGE 222 =====
222   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Complications               ↑ QT interval (with right radical          Probably caused by interruption of cervical sympa-
                                  (cont’d)                    neck dissection)                         thetic outflow to heart
                                                            Dysrhythmias                               Due to either the carotid sinus stimulation or the ↑
                                                                                                       QT interval

                                VAE                         ↓ ETCO2                                    With large veins open in the neck, VAE is pos-
                                                            ↑ ETN2                                     sible and may account for unexplained ↓ BP and/
                                                            ↓ BP                                       or dysrhythmia. Rx: Notify surgeon (compress
                                                            ↑ ST segment                               open neck veins); flood field with NS; left lateral decu-
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                            “Mill wheel” murmur                        bitus/head-down position; aspirate CVP; FiO2 = 1.0;
    Otolaryngology—

                                                            Dysrhythmias                               circulatory support (fluid, pressors, as required).

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               ↑ BP and ↑ HR                              2° carotid sinus denervation; Rx: aggressive phar-
                                                                                                       macological intervention.
                                                            Nerve injury                               Facial nerve injury → facial droop. Recurrent
                                                            Diaphragmatic paralysis                    laryngeal nerve injury can result in VC dysfunction.
                                                                                                        Phrenic nerve injury → respiratory problems 2°
                                                                                                        diaphragmatic paralysis.
                                                            Pneumothorax                                Pneumothorax may occur with low neck dissection.
                                                                                                        Dx and Rx: See Postop Complications after Laryngos-
                                                                                                        copy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy, p. 189
                                                            Agitation                                   Agitation → ↑PaCO2, ↓PaO2, ↑HR. Rx: 3 restrictive
                                                                                                        neck dressings; evacuate any hematoma; reestablish
                                                                                                        airway with ETT; FiO2=1.0; ventilatory support, if
                                                                                                        required.

                                Pain                        PCA (p. C-3)
                                  management              Parenteral opiates (p. C-3)

                                Tests                       CXR                                        For position of tracheostomy tube, evidence of
                                                                                                       pneumothorax and CVP line placement
                                                            ECG                                        For diagnosis of rhythm disturbances

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Bonner S, Taylor M: Airway obstruction in head and neck surgery. Anaesthesia 2000; 55:290–1.
                                  2. Brown BR: Anaesthesia for ear, nose, throat and maxillofacial procedures. In: Prys-Roberts C, Brown BR, eds. International
                                     Practice of Anaesthesia. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford: 1996, 2–9.
                                  3. Cavallone LF, Vannucci A: American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of the Difficult Airway. Review
                                     article: extubation of the difficult airway and extubation failure. Anesth Analg 2013; 116(2):368–83.
                                  4. Dougherty TB, Nguyen DT: Anesthetic management of the patient scheduled for head and neck cancer surgery. J Clin Anesth
                                     1994; 6:74–82.
                                  5. Mason RA, Fielder CP: The obstructed airway in head and neck surgery. Anaesthesia 1999; 54:625–8.
                                  6. McGuirt WF, May JS: Postoperative hypertension associated with radical neck dissection. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
                                     1987; 113:1098–110.
                                  7. Prasad KC, Shanmugam VU: Major neck surgeries under regional anesthesia. Am J Otol 1998; 19:163–9.
                                  8. Rice JH, Gonzalez RM: Large visible gas bubbles in the internal jugular vein: a common occurrence during supine radical neck
                                     surgery? J Clin Anesth 1992; 4:21–4.
                                  9. Rice M, Turner M, Carapiet D: The use of the laryngeal mask airway in maxillofacial surgery. Anaesthesia 2002; 57:826.
                                 10. Wittich DJ, Berny JJ, Davis RK: Cervical epidural anesthesia for head and neck surgery. Laryngoscope 1984; 94:615–9.

===== PAGE 223 =====
Lymph Node Biopsy   223

                   LYMPH NODE BIOPSY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: An open cervical node biopsy is indicated when a fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA) has proven
                   inadequate or is felt likely to be inadequate (as in determining a type of lymphoma). This can be done under local an-
                   esthesia, with or without monitoring, or under general anesthesia. A node is chosen based on its likelihood to answer

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                   the clinical question and minimization of operative risk to adjacent structures, especially, for example, the accesory

                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   nerve that runs in level 5 (posterior triangle) from about the midportion of the posterior border of the SCM toward
                   the posterior clavicle and may be quite superficial.
                   Operative and anesthesia considerations are similar to that of a SOHND, except that the incision should be only a few
                   cm, and its location is variable though still in a RSTL (resting skin tension line), pain should be low, a small drain or
                   no drain is used, and the patient should be able to go home the day of surgery. Often the surgeon will request a frozen
                   section to be sure there is diagnostic tissue available.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine, head extended and turned to opposite side

                     Incision                 Small (often requiring only local anesthesia)

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g

                     Surgical Time            10 min

                     EBL                      Minimal

                     Postop Care              Drain management

                     Mortality                Very rare

                     Morbidity                Rare injury to adjacent structures (e.g., accessory nerve)

                     Pain Score               1–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Wide range

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Common

                     Etiology                 In adults: 80% benign: pleomorphic adenoma (benign mixed tumor) 75% of these.
                                              20% malignant: low grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, other.
                                              Chronic sialadenitis/stone rare
                                              In children: a greater % malignancy; 60% benign, 35% malignant. Chronic sialadenitis/stone <5%

                     Associated               None
                       conditions

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Mandel JE: Laryngeal mask airways in ear, nose, and throat procedures. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28(3):469–83.

===== PAGE 224 =====
224   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                PAROTIDECTOMY: SUPERFICIAL, TOTAL, OR RADICAL
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: A superficial parotidectomy (more accurately a lateral or a supraneural parotidectomy) removes
                                tissue of the parotid lateral to the facial nerve, dissecting and protecting the facial nerve (Fig. 3-8). It usually is
                                performed for a tumor, but occasionally is performed for infectious disorders or to enable the surgeon to ap-
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                proach tumors of the deep lobe. A total parotidectomy is performed for either infectious disorders or for parotid
    Otolaryngology—

                                tumors that arise in or extend medial to the facial nerve. The integrity of the facial nerve is preserved during total
                                parotidectomy, as long as it is not involved with malignancy. It may be combined with a neck dissection or with a
                                modified temporal bone resection when the tumor extends into the ear canal or middle ear or invades the facial
                                nerve at the base of the skull.

                                                         Incision

                                                                                                                                    Conchal Cartilage
                                                                                                                                        Tympanic bone

                                                                                                                                              Tympanomastoid
                                                                                                                                              fissure

                                                                                                                                         Facial nerve trunk
                                                     ANTERIOR
                                                                                                                                                       POSTERIOR
                                                                    Angle of Mandible

                                                       Anterior facial vein                                                       Digastric m.

                                                      Ramus mandibularis n.
                                                     Cervical branch
                                                                                                                           Sternocleidomastoid m.
                                                     of facial n.
                                                                                                                        Parotid gland tail

                                                                                                        Lower branch of facial nerve
                                                                                          Posterior     crossing over posterior facial vein
                                                                              Common
                                                                                          facial vein
                                                                              facial vein

                                          Figure 3-8. Inferior approach to facial nerve. The lower branch of the facial nerve is
                                          found immediately external to the posterior facial vein as it exits the lower pole of the
                                          parotid gland. The lower branch may divide into the ramus mandibularis and cervical
                                          branches before or after crossing the posterior facial vein. The lower branch of the
                                          facial nerve is dissected proximally to the facial-nerve trunk. The posterior facial vein
                                          should not be confused with the external jugular vein, as the facial vein runs deep to
                                          the sternocleidomastoid muscle, whereas the external jugular vein lies superficial to
                                          this muscle. Elevation of the tail of the parotid gland greatly facilitates this dissection,
                                          which must be accomplished in a plane between the posterior facial vein and the
                                          parotid gland. (Reproduced with permission from Montgomery WW: Surgery of the
                                          Upper Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

===== PAGE 225 =====
Parotidectomy: Superficial, Total, or Radical   225

                                                                                                                  Sup. Temporal V.

                                                                                                                     Isthmus to
                                                                                                                   the Deep Lobe

                                                                                                                   Temporofacial

                                                                                                                                                            Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                     Division

                                                                                                                                                              Otolaryngology—
                                                                                                             Cervicofacial Division

                                                                                                             Digastric m.

                                                                                                                  Masseter m.

                                             Allis Clamp

                                                                                                  Stylohyoid m.

                                Figure 3-9. The parotid gland has been dissected from the trunk, divisions, and
                                branches of the facial nerve. The anterior projection of the gland has been dissected
                                free, and the parotid duct is being ligated. This dissection is conducted, for the most
                                part, with a hemostat clamp. First, tunnels are created lateral to the branches; and the
                                fascia between tunnels is incised as the gland is dissected forward. The facial-nerve
                                stimulator is a useful adjunct to this dissection. (Reproduced with permission from
                                Montgomery WW: Surgery of the Upper Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams &
                                Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

                   A radical parotidectomy removes the total parotid gland, together with the facial nerve, (which usually is recon-
                   structed with a facial-nerve graft). The mastoid may have to be drilled to get a healthy proximal end of the facial
                   nerve. Microsurgical techniques are then used to graft the resected nerve. The donar nerve may be the greater
                   auricular nerve or the sural nerve.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Benign or malignant tumor; occasionally infectious

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Superficial/Total                                      Radical

                     Position                Supine; head turned slightly to opposite side          ⇐

                     Incision                Preauricular, extending into neck; has many            May require postaural extension for mastoid
                                             variations, including modified face-lift incision.     access.

                     Special                 Facial nerve stimulator, facial nerve monitor.         ⇐+ drill for mastoidectomy; microscope/
                       instrumentation                                                              microsurgical instruments and 9-0 nylon for
                                                                                                    nerve reanastomosis.

                     Unique                  Initial muscle relaxation is not indicated 2°          ⇐
                       considerations        facial nerve identification. Tape oral ETT to the
                                             opposite side of the mandible.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g                                          ⇐

                     Surgical time           1.5–4 h                                                4–8 h

===== PAGE 226 =====
226   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                         Superficial/Total                                  Radical

                                 EBL                     25–200 mL                                          500–700 mL for total parotidectomy, neck
                                                                                                            dissection, and modified temporal bone resec-
                                                                                                            tion. Sudden, large blood losses do not occur;
                                                                                                            transfusion usually not necessary.

                                 Mortality               Very rare                                          ⇐
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 Morbidity               Dysesthesia or anesthesia of the greater           Facial nerve loss: With graft, function returns
                                                            auricular nerve: 100% (almost all will          slowly over 1 yr.
                                                            recover within 1 yr)
                                                         Facial nerve weakness (temporary): 20–50%          ⇐
                                                         Frey’s syndrome: < 5% will have clinically both-   ⇐
                                                            ersome gustatory sweating.
                                                         Bleeding: 4%                                       ⇐
                                                         Infection: 4%                                      ⇐
                                                         Permanent facial nerve paralysis: < 1%             ⇐

                                 Pain score              2–4                                                4–6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Infants–old age

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Common

                                 Etiology                Benign mixed tumor (pleomorphic adenoma) (75%); variety of low- to high-grade malignant can-
                                                         cers (25%); chronic sialoadenitis (results from ductal strictures and/or stones) (rare)

                                 Associated              Nonspecific
                                   conditions

                                SUBMANDIBULAR GLAND EXCISION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Removal of the submandibular gland is performed for either chronic sialoadenitis due to ductal stric-
                                tures and/or stones or benign or malignant tumors of the submandibular gland. (General anatomy of the area is
                                shown in Fig. 3-10.) The patient lies supine with a pillow under the shoulder, and head turned slightly to the opposite
                                side. A skin crease incision is made below the mandible and skin flaps elevated. The marginal mandibular nerve is
                                identified or may be avoided by identifying the facial vein and dissecting deep to its plane, employing the Hayes-
                                Martin maneuver. Dissection is carried out within the capsule of the submandibular gland, which is then excised
                                and removed. Frozen section usually is performed, and if necessary, further excision, including a neck dissection for
                                high-grade malignancies, is done.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Occasionally, it may be necessary to perform a neck dissection (radical or
                                functional) in the case of high-grade malignancy.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic sialoadenitis; stones; benign or malignant tumors

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                Upper neck skin crease

===== PAGE 227 =====
Submandibular Gland Excision   227

                                                                                             Submandibular Gland
                                                      Wharton’s Duct

                                                                                                                                                             Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                               Otolaryngology—
                                        Genioglossus m.

                                            Hyoglossus m.                                                            Proximal End of
                                                                                                                   External Maxillary A.
                                                                                                                   Ligated and Divided

                                               Hypoglossal n.

                                Figure 3-10. Exposure of the submandibular gland. (Reproduced with permission from
                                Montgomery WW: Surgery of the Upper Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams &
                                Wilkins, Baltimore: 1996.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                   Occasionally, facial nerve stimulator
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                    If surgeon plans to use facial nerve stimulator, muscle relaxation is contraindicated.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics               Usually not indicated

                     Surgical time             0.5–1 h

                     EBL                       25 mL (400 mL if neck dissection is done)

                     Postop care               PACU → room or home

                     Mortality                 Minimal

                     Morbidity                 Marginal mandibular nerve paresis or paralysis: 20%
                                               Bleeding: 4%
                                               Infection: 4%
                                               Lingual dysesthesia: 1%
                                               XIIth nerve paresis or paralysis: ≤1%

                     Pain score                2–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 Unlimited

                     Male:Female               1:1

                     Incidence                 Rare

                     Etiology                  Chronic infection
                                               Neoplasia: ~60% of tumors are benign with the remaining being low- and high-grade malignancies.

                     Associated                Nonspecific
                       conditions

===== PAGE 228 =====
228   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                (Procedures covered: parotidectomy, submandibular gland excision)

                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                The majority of these patients are > 40 yr, and any coexisting medical conditions should be fully evaluated. Diseases
                                of the parotid gland have been associated with ETOH abuse and with autoimmune disease (e.g., Mikulicz-Sjögren
                                syndrome); therefore, Sx of these conditions should be sought.
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                Respiratory                Airway may be affected by impaired mouth opening or parotid gland enlargement.
                                                           Patients with involvement of the masseter muscle may present with trismus.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Neurological               Surgical approach to the parotid gland will place the facial nerve at jeopardy; any preop
                                                           facial nerve deficits should be documented. Also see Preoperative Considerations for
                                                           Laryngoscopy/Bronchoscopy/Esophagoscopy, p. 184.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Hematologic                Submandibular and parotid malignancies may be associated with chronic debilitation and
                                                           anemia.
                                                           Tests: CBC

                                Laboratory                 Other tests as indicated from H&P; liver panel and coags in patients with Hx of ETOH
                                                           abuse

                                Premedication              Standard premedication (p. B-1)

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA is most commonly used. Use of a FLMA also has been advocated, but does not rep-
                                resent the author’s preference due to the possibility of distorted neck anatomy caused by the inflated FLMA cuff. The
                                FLMA also may be displaced 2° surgical intrusion into the submandibular space and occasional intraoral surgical
                                manipulation. These procedures involve meticulous surgical dissection and are characterized by alternating levels of
                                stimulation: relatively long, stable levels of stimulation, with sudden adrenergic responses when surgery progresses
                                into deeper fascial planes. (For essential surgical requirements, see Introduction, p. 178.) Emergence should be rapid
                                enough to allow immediate patient cooperation for assessment of facial nerve function by the surgeon. Muscle re-
                                laxation with nondepolarizing NMB may or may not be contraindicated, depending on the surgeon’s preference and
                                type of surgery performed (inquire preop). Patients after submandibular gland resection may be discharged home
                                the same day, while parotidectomy patients are admitted to the ward.

                                Induction                  Opioid-based techniques (see Introduction, p. 178) are beneficial. Standard iv induction
                                                           with propofol (1–2 mg/kg) is typically employed. ETT should be carefully secured on the
                                                           nonoperative side. Nasal intubation may be requested by the surgeon (inquire preop) for
                                                           selected cases, to allow full manipulation of the patient’s jaw.

                                Maintenance                Moderate ↓ BP (see Introduction, p. 178) will greatly improve operating conditions and
                                                           speed up the surgery. The use of a remifentanil infusion supplemented with sufentanil or
                                                           fentanyl will promote ↓BP. Anticipate ↑ anesthetic requirements in patients with Hx of
                                                           ETOH abuse. NMB is typically avoided to allow for intraop monitoring of the facial nerve
                                                           (parotidectomy) or marginal mandibular nerve (submandibular gland excision).

                                Emergence                  Smooth emergence is extremely desirable, and absence of reaction to the ETT is obliga-
                                                           tory if facial nerve repair has been performed.

                                Blood and fluid            EBL typically ~200 mL                  3rd spacing is usually minimal.
                                   requirements            IV: 18 ga × 1
                                                           NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h

                                Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)

===== PAGE 229 =====
Endoscopic Sinus Surgery           229

                    Positioning                 Table usually is rotated 90–180° away from the anesthesiologist.
                                                3 pad pressure points
                                                3 eyes

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Facial paralysis 2° surgical trauma        Notify surgeons.

                                                                                                                                                                 Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                   Otolaryngology—
                    Pain                        Parenteral opiates (p. C-3)
                      management                PCA (p. C-3)

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Feldman MA, Patel A: Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition.
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2010, 2357–88.
                     2. Mandel JE: Laryngeal mask airways in ear, nose, and throat procedures. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28(3):469–83.

                   ENDOSCOPIC SINUS SURGERY
                   Peter H. Hwang and Sarmela T. Sunder

                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Sinus surgery is performed most often for the management of chronic sinus disease, nasal polyps,
                   recurrent sinus infections, or for neoplastic conditions that may cause obstruction of the sinus cavities. This sur-
                   gery includes either external procedures, through the skin or oral cavity, or endoscopic approaches, through the
                   nostrils. The endoscopic approach—the preferred technique for most surgeons—is called endoscopic sinus surgery
                   (ESS) or functional ESS (FESS). Other surgical procedures—including septoplasty, turbinate reduction, and, occa-
                   sionally, sleep apnea surgery involving the tonsils, palate, and oropharynx—may be combined with FESS.
                   Endoscopic Sinus Surgery: ESS or FESS is a minimally invasive technique that utilizes telescopes intranasally
                   to visualize and access the paranasal sinuses and anterior skull base. The primary indication for ESS is chronic
                   sinusitis that has failed to clear with aggressive medical therapy. The goal of ESS is to open the sinuses through a
                   transnasal minimally invasive approach. Inflamed bone and tissue are cleared from the outflow tracts of the sinuses
                   under direct endoscopic illumination and magnification. By surgically enhancing the drainage and ventilation of the
                   sinuses, normal mucociliary clearance can be restored. Depending on the extent of disease, surgery may involve the
                   maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid, and/or frontal sinuses. If all four sinuses are being treated, a maxillary antrostomy is
                   typically performed first, followed by an ethmoidectomy. A sphenoidotomy and frontal sinusotomy usually follow
                   thereafter.
                   Providing openings (drainage, aeration) to the sinus cavities and obtaining tissue for pathological evaluation are
                   the main aims of ESS. Patients are orally intubated, and a throat pack can be placed in the pharynx to decrease the
                   amount of blood swallowed. Oral gastric tubes are recommended if more than minimal bleeding is expected. Follow-
                   ing induction of anesthesia, local medications are applied to the nasal cavity, including injection of 1% lidocaine with
                   1:100,000 epinephrine and/or topical application of 4% cocaine. It is important that these local medications be noted
                   in the anesthesia record, as complications (HTN, dysrhythmias, seizures) from local application have been reported.
                   Patients with a history of illicit cocaine use should be warned of potential drug interactions, and the intraop use of
                   vasoactive drugs should be limited to avoid unexpected cardiovascular events.
                   At the end of the procedure, packing may be placed. It is imperative that any pharyngeal or throat pack be removed
                   before the end of the procedure to avoid airway destruction.
                   Sinus surgical procedures may use image guidance or surgical navigation tools. These computer-assisted tech-
                   niques involve a preop CT or MRI scan to create a navigational map for the surgeon to localize disease, normal

===== PAGE 230 =====
230   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                tissues, and the boundaries of the surgical dissection. Surrounding the sinuses are several vital structures, including
                                the periorbital tissues (e.g., orbital muscles, lacrimal apparatus, and the optic nerve), the sphenopalatine artery, eth-
                                moid arteries, the carotid artery, as well as the skull base.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: For external approaches to sinus surgery, see External Sinus Surgery, p. 235.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Nasal polyps; chronic sinusitis; recurrent acute sinus infections, benign and malignant
                                tumors, inverted papilloma, and management of previous surgical complications (e.g., repair of CSF leak, lacrimal
                                duct injury, and persistent or remnant ethmoid cells, scar tissue formation)
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                Preoperative Management: Patients should receive a decongestant nasal spray, such as oxymetazoline, pre-op
    Otolaryngology—

                                to reduce nasal edema. This is generally given 30 min. before the start of the case, with repeat administration
                                every 10–15 min. Preop antibiotics or steroids will vary depending on surgeon preference. Typically, an antibi-
                                otic with gram-positive and some gram-negative coverage (such as cephalexin) and an intravenous steroid such
                                as dexamethasone are administered.
                                Intraoperative Management: ESS is usually performed under GA, using either endotracheal intubation or an
                                LMA. The LMA offers the potential advantages of reducing the entry of blood into the stomach and causing
                                less bucking or coughing during emergence (which may provoke unnecessary bleeding from the surgical site).
                                The tube should be taped securely to the left side or midline of the patient’s mouth. The OR table is routinely
                                turned 90° or 180°, and the patient is positioned with the head slightly elevated. The surgeon sits or stands at
                                the patient’s right and operates from a video monitor positioned at the patient’s head.
                                The eyes are taped but should remain visible in the surgical field throughout the procedure so that the status of the
                                orbits may be noted by the surgeon. The presence of ecchymosis or proptosis suggests a transgression of the thin
                                bony orbital wall and requires immediate attention. Throughout the procedure, the surgeon may palpate the orbit
                                externally while endoscopically evaluating for dehiscences of the orbital wall, which if present will reveal transmitted
                                movement of orbital fat or periorbita.
                                In more complex FESS or endoscopic skull base surgery, the surgeon may use a stereotactic navigation system to
                                map out the surgical field according to a preoperatively acquired CT or MRI scan. During preparation of the patient,
                                a localizing headset is placed over the patient’s forehead, and a computer workstation tower is positioned adjacent
                                to the head of the patient. After a registration process, a navigating probe communicates with the workstation via
                                electromagnetic or infrared technology to provide triplanar localization of the probe tip relative to critical anatomic
                                structures in and adjacent to the sinuses.
                                Hemostasis is critical in endoscopic sinus surgery, where the small lens of the endoscope (4 mm) can be easily ob-
                                scured by blood. When possible, a hypotensive anesthesia regimen can reduce bleeding and thereby optimize the
                                surgeon’s view of the operative field. It may be reasonable to maintain blood pressure at ~ 80% of the preop level.
                                To improve hemostasis, the surgeon may place pledgets soaked in a vasoconstrictive agent such as cocaine, oxymetazo-
                                line, or epinephrine in the nasal cavity before starting the case. A transoral or transnasal sphenopalatine ganglion block
                                may be performed using 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine, which will provide vasoconstriction of the spheno-
                                palatine artery. The lateral nasal wall and middle turbinate are also infiltrated with lidocaine/epinephrine. Additional
                                vasoconstrictor-soaked pledgets may be placed in the operative field during the procedure to control oozing.
                                Complications of Endoscopic Sinus Surgery: Along the boundaries of the paranasal sinuses lie important
                                structures that may be injured in the course of the procedure.
                                Maxillary Sinus: Just anterior to the maxillary sinus ostium lies the nasolacrimal duct. Injury to this structure,
                                manifesting as excessive tearing, will not usually be evident until postop.
                                Ethmoid Sinus: Two critical boundaries of the ethmoid sinus are the medial orbital wall laterally and the skull base
                                superiorly. Transgression of the orbit may result in medial rectus injury, prolapse of orbital fat, or orbital hemor-
                                rhage. If orbital hemorrhage progresses to the point of marked proptosis, vision may be threatened, and an emergent
                                decompression of the orbit may be required via lateral canthotomy and cantholysis.
                                The superior extent of the ethmoid dissection is the cribriform plate and the anterior skull base. A breach through
                                the ethmoid roof may result in a cerebrospinal fluid leak. Cerebrospinal fluid leaks require immediate repair using
                                autogenous tissue grafts and require an inpatient recovery period. Vigorous bag-mask ventilation should be avoided
                                in patients with known skull base defects because of the risk of creating a pneumocephalus.
                                Sphenoid Sinus: The sphenoid sinus, the posteriormost of the paranasal sinuses, lies adjacent to critical structures of
                                the parasellar region. The carotid artery and optic nerve run along the superolateral wall of the sphenoid sinus. Any

===== PAGE 231 =====
Endoscopic Sinus Surgery        231

                   significant bleeding on entry into or while working in the sphenoid sinus is concerning for potential carotid injury.
                   Carotid artery injury requires emergent tamponade, possible fluid resuscitation, and angiography with embolization.
                   Frontal Sinus: Endoscopic approaches to the frontal sinus are especially challenging because of the narrowness of the
                   region. Violation of the cribriform plate medially or the orbital wall laterally may lead to complications of CSF leak
                   or eye injury, respectively.
                   Postop Management: In the PACU, patients s/p ESS require continued monitoring for possible delayed manifesta-
                   tion of complications. Maintaining normotensive hemodynamics is extremely helpful in controlling postop bleed-
                   ing. Changing nasal dressings for oozing every 20–30 min is expected, but brisker bleeding should be evaluated by

                                                                                                                                                       Head and Neck Surgery
                   the surgeon for possible arterial sources requiring intervention.

                                                                                                                                                         Otolaryngology—
                   Orbital injury can also present in the postop period with significant pain, diminished visual acuity, diplopia, propto-
                   sis, or ecchymosis. Any complaints of eye pain or visual changes need to be addressed urgently. The surgeon must be
                   alerted immediately, and an ophthalmology consult should be considered.
                   Altered mental status, focal neurologic exam, or severe headache may indicate a possible intracranial complication.
                   Clear rhinorrhea, especially unilateral, should be closely evaluated for the possibility of cerebrospinal fluid leak.

                   Other Applications of Endoscopes in Sinonasal Surgery: Although the most common indication for
                   endoscopic sinus surgery is medically refractory chronic sinusitis, endoscopic techniques can be applied to wide
                    range of sinonasal and skull base pathology. OR setup and patient positioning is identical to that for ESS (except
                    as noted).
                   Turbinate Reduction: The inferior turbinate is the largest of the nasal turbinates (inferior, middle, superior) and
                   when hypertrophied can cause nasal obstruction. Various methods exist for inferior turbinate reduction and include
                   radiofrequency ablation, cauterization, submucosal resection, partial resection and out-fracture. Both turbinate

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine; table turned 90° or 180°

                     Incision               Mucosal, intranasal

                     Special                4 mm nasal endoscopes, camera monitor, computer-guided navigation system
                       instrumentation

                     Premedication          Cefazolin 1 g, dexamethasone 8–12 mg

                     Surgical time          1–3 h

                     EBL                    50–300 mL; transfusions rare

                     Postop care            PACU monitoring for surgical complications; discharge home from PACU

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              1% major complication rate (see complications of ESS above)

                     Pain Score             2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              15–80

                     Male:Female            1:1.5

                     Incidence              Common

                     Etiology               Medically refractory chronic sinusitis

                     Associated             Asthma, allergic rhinitis, migraine
                       conditions

===== PAGE 232 =====
232   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                cauterization and RF ablation involve inserting a probe into the soft tissue of the turbinate and producing a coagulative
                                lesion, which ultimately contracts to reduce the turbinate soft tissue. Similarly, submucosal reduction involves making
                                an incision through the mucosa and mechanically reducing the underlying soft tissue. Partial resection of the turbinate
                                involves cutting through the bone, soft tissue, and mucosa of the anterior one-third of the turbinate. At the conclusion,
                                the cut edges are cauterized. The main adverse event from the majority of procedures on the turbinate is bleeding,
                                which is usually controlled with cautery or nasal packing.
                                Septoplasty: Septal deviation may arise congenitally or during periods of rapid craniofacial growth, or from nasal
                                trauma. Septoplasty is indicated when the septal deviation causes obstructed nasal breathing. Through an incision in
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                the nasal vestibule, a mucoperichondrial septal flap is elevated to reveal deflections in the underlying septal cartilage
    Otolaryngology—

                                and bone. Selective excision of bone and cartilage allows the septum to return to a midline position. Although the
                                procedure may be performed using direct visualization with a headlight, nasal endoscopy provides superb visualiza-
                                tion and allows for precise surgical maneuvering.
                                Control of Epistaxis: Control of epistaxis can usually be performed in the clinic; however, the OR provides a
                                controlled environment suitable for high-risk patients and patients with profuse bleeding. Under endoscopic
                                visualization, bleeding sites can be readily identified and controlled with cautery or laser. A more definitive pro-
                                cedure to control posterior epistaxis is sphenopalatine artery ligation. The artery is identified at the posteriormost
                                aspect of the middle turbinate through a mucoperiosteal incision. The artery is then cauterized or ligated with
                                surgical clips.
                                Orbital Decompression: Endoscopic orbital decompression is performed for Graves’ ophthalmopathy to preserve
                                diminishing vision and to improve cosmesis associated with exophthalmos. An ethmoidectomy is performed first,
                                followed by removal of the medial orbital wall. After adequate exposure is achieved, the orbital periosteum is incised,
                                causing the orbital fat to prolapse into the ethmoid cavity, thereby decompressing the orbit contents. Decompression
                                may be extended to the floor of the orbit if medial decompression alone is insufficient.
                                Repair of CSF leak: Discontinuity of the anterior skull base, occurring traumatically or spontaneously, may result
                                in CSF rhinorrhea. The defect may be a small crack in the skull base or a larger defect with prolapse of meninges or
                                brain tissue through the defect. The majority of anterior skull base CSF leaks can be closed effectively with endo-
                                scopic approaches. Meningoencephaloceles that protrude through a bony skull base defect are reduced with bipolar
                                cautery. After endoscopic visualization of the bony defect, a layered repair is performed using bone or cartilage, fol-
                                lowed by a free mucosal graft.
                                A lumbar subarachnoid drain may be placed prior to starting the case. Fluorescein can be placed through the
                                drain to aid in identifying the leak site during surgery. If fluorescein is used, it must be carefully measured and
                                administered to avoid the neurotoxic effects of overdose (accepted dose is 0.1 cc of 10% fluorescein mixed in 10cc
                                of nonbacteriostatic saline, administered slowly over 5 min). Postop, patients remain at bedrest for 1–3 d, typically
                                as an inpatient.
                                Pituitary Surgery: The application of endoscopic technique to transnasal transphenoidal approaches to the sella
                                provides an excellent panoramic view unavailable with microscopic approaches. Pituitary adenomas, craniopha-
                                ryngiomas, and other sellar masses are suitable for endoscopic resection. The operating team consists of a neu-
                                rosurgeon and an otolaryngologist working in concert. The approach is performed by the otolaryngologist, while
                                the tumor resection is performed by the neurosurgeon under endoscopic guidance by the otolaryngologist (“four
                                hands technique”). After performing intraoral greater palatine blocks and topically decongesting the nasal mu-
                                cosa, the surgeon performing the approach creates bilateral sphenoidotomies. The posterior portion of the septum
                                is then resected, allowing for the subsequent removal of the remainder of the sphenoid rostrum. This provides
                                wide exposure of the sella and parasellar anatomy. The sella is then entered, and tumor resection is performed
                                endoscopically.
                                The dissection of the sella risks injury to the adjacent optic nerve, cavernous sinus, and carotid artery. The anesthesi-
                                ologist should be prepared to hemodynamically resuscitate the patient in the rare event of a carotid injury. Additional
                                monitoring such as an arterial line may be indicated at the discretion of the anesthesiologist.
                                A CSF leak may occur if the arachnoid is breached during the tumor resection. This is repaired easily with abdominal
                                fat, fibrin glue, and an absorbable reconstruction plate. In the event of a CSF leak, a lumbar subarachnoid drain may
                                be placed.

===== PAGE 233 =====
Endoscopic Sinus Surgery         233

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   The majority of these procedures are performed on an outpatient basis. Patients with extensive polypoid disease may
                   be at risk for substantial (> 400 mL) blood loss. Many of these patients will have received a short preop course of
                   steroid therapy to decrease tissue swelling and reduce bleeding intraop. Routine intraop administration of decadron
                   (8–12 mg iv) to minimize postop edema makes additional stress-dose of glucocorticoids unnecessary.

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                                             Many patients with nasal polyposis have a high incidence of reactive airway disease (up to

                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                    Respiratory
                                             26%) as well as a hypersensitivity to aspirin, which can precipitate bronchospasm (triad
                                             patients). In these patients, NSAIDs, including ketorolac, should be avoided. In general, ke-
                                             torolac administration for postop pain relief is not recommended in these patients because
                                             it may promote microvascular bleeding.
                                             Tests: CXR, as indicated by H&P

                    Cardiovascular           See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal Surgery, p. 241.

                    Premedication            See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal Surgery, p. 241.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: FESS can be performed under local anesthesia with sedation (MAC) or GA. The essential
                   surgical requirements are similar to those for other types of nasal surgery (see Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal
                   Surgery, p. 241), although more meticulous control of intraop BP is crucial. Local anesthesia offers the advantage
                   of reduced blood loss, but GA is performed more frequently and may be associated with ↓ incidence of surgical
                   complications. Patients with extensive sinus disease, history of multiple previous nasal and sinus surgeries, patients
                   feeling uneasy about being awake, and those with reactive airway disease, or labile HTN may not be candidates for
                   MAC. Use of a FLMA instead of an ETT offers significant advantages (see Introduction, p. 178), including decreasing
                   airway reactivity and improving mucociliary clearance.
                   Maintaining intraop controlled hypotension (see Introduction, p. 178) is essential for improving surgical visibility
                   and operating conditions. Although MAP may largely affect the arterial inflow, other factors including the condition
                   of the vascular network, local mechanisms regulating functional nasal capillary density, and local venous pressure
                   also play a significant role in regulating overall nasal capillary perfusion. As with other types of nasal surgery, these
                   procedures are typically characterized by minimal immediate postop pain 2° submucosal infiltrative local anesthesia
                   used by the surgeon.

                    Induction                (See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal Surgery, p. 241). The patient’s eyes should be
                                             protected in a manner that allows the surgeon to quickly diagnose proptosis in case of
                                             inadvertent orbital wall penetration and intraorbital hemorrhage.

                    Maintenance              (See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal Surgery, p. 241). TIVA, with or without nitrous
                                             oxide, promotes superior hemodynamic stability and minimizes direct peripheral vaso-
                                             dilation. When additional ↓ BP is required esmolol is preferred over SNP. Breakthrough
                                             adrenergic responses occur more frequently with FESS compared to other types of nasal
                                             surgery because many reflexogenic areas (e.g., skull base) cannot be blocked by infiltrative
                                             local anesthesia. These responses can be effectively controlled by vasoactive agents or ad-
                                             ditional boluses of remifentanil (0.5–1.0 mcg/kg iv). The anesthesiologist should frequently
                                             observe the video monitor for signs of possible complications—prolapse of periorbital fat
                                             (orbital injury), “wash-out” of blood in the surgical field (CSF leak).

                    Emergence                (See Anesthetic Considerations for Nasal Surgery, p. 241). If a dural injury has occurred, a
                                             smooth extubation is mandatory.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 20 ga × 1 (unilateral      Blood loss can be substantial in high-risk patients (as
                       requirements          FESS)                          described above).

===== PAGE 234 =====
234   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Blood and fluid             20–18 ga × 1 (bilateral FESS) Meticulous surgical technique and the use of injectable vaso-
                                   requirements             NS/LR @ 3–4 cc/kg/h           constrictors are essential in reducing intraop bleeding. An iv
                                   (cont’d)                 Blood loss generally          is usually placed at the side where the surgeon is positioned
                                                            100–150 mL                    (patient’s right upper extremity).

                                Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)        Prevent BP cuff from inflating against the surgeon’s hands
                                                            BP cuff left arm                  during delicate endoscopic manipulation.

                                Positioning                 Table turned 90–180°              Patient’s arms usually tucked and carefully padded
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                            Head elevated 15–30°
    Otolaryngology—

                                                            3 and pad pressure points
                                                            3 eyes

                                Complications               Dysrhythmias                      Usually related to use of vasoconstrictor agents; and may
                                                            Tachycardia                       present a problem in patients with CAD. Short-acting b-
                                                                                              blocker (esmolol 0.5–1.0 mg/kg iv boluses) should be avail-
                                                                                              able to blunt these hemodynamic effects.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE
                                 Complications              Occult bleeding                             Occult postop bleeding may cause the patient to
                                                                                                        swallow large quantities of blood (↑ aspiration risk),
                                                                                                        and repacking the nostrils may be required.

                                 Pain                       Fentanyl 25–50 mcg iv prn is usu-           Occasionally, pain after FESS may be significant.
                                   management               ally sufficient.                            If external approaches to the sinuses were utilized,
                                                                                                        higher doses of opioids may be necessary.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Bhatti MT, Stankiewicz JA: Ophthalmic complications of endoscopic sinus surgery. Surv Ophthalmol 2003; 48:389–402.
                                  2. Boezaart AP, Van der Merwe J, Coetzee A: Comparison of sodium nitroprusside- and esmolol-induced hypotension for
                                     functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Can J Anesth 1995; 42:373–6.
                                  3. Bolger WE, Kennedy DW: Surgical complications and postoperative care. In: DW Kennedy, WE Bolger, SJ Zinreich, eds.
                                     Diseases of the Sinuses: Diagnosis and Management. B.C. Decker, Hamilton: 2001, 303–16.
                                  4. Eberhart LH, Folz BJ, Wulf H, et al: Intravenous anesthesia provides optimal surgical conditions during microscopic and
                                     endoscopic sinus surgery. Laryngoscope 2003; 113:1369–73.
                                  5. Enoki T, Tsuchiya N, Shinomura T, et al: Effect of hypercapnia on arterial hypotension after induction of anaesthesia. Acta
                                     Anaesthesiol Scand 2005; 49:687–91.
                                  6. Howarth PH: Leukotrienes in rhinitis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161:S133–6.
                                  7. Jacobi KE, Bohm BE, Rickauer AJ, et al: Moderate controlled hypotension with sodium nitroprusside does not improve
                                     surgical conditions or decrease blood loss in endoscopic sinus surgery. J Clin Anesth 2000; 12:202–7.
                                  8. Kinsella JB, Calhoun KH, Bradfield JJ, et al: Complications of endoscopic sinus surgery in a residency training program.
                                     Laryngoscope 1995; 105:1029–32.
                                  9. May M, Levine HL, Mester SJ, et al: Complications of endoscopic sinus surgery: analysis of 2108 patients—incidence and
                                     prevention. Laryngoscope 1994; 104:1080–3.
                                 10. Nair S, Collins M, Hung P, et al: The effect of beta-blocker premedication on the surgical field during endoscopic sinus
                                     surgery. Laryngoscope 2004; 114:1042–6.
                                 11. Nekhendzy V, Lemmens HJ, Vaughan WC, et al: The effect of deliberate hypercapnia and hypocapnia on intraoperative blood
                                     loss and quality of surgical field during functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Anesth Analg 2007; 105:1404–9.
                                 12. Webster AC, Morley-Foster PK, Janzen V, et al: Anesthesia for intranasal surgery: a comparison between tracheal intubation
                                     and the flexible reinforced laryngeal mask airway. Anesth Analg 1999; 88:421–5.
                                 13. Wormald PJ, Van Renen G, Perks J, et al: The effect of the total intravenous anesthesia compared with inhalational anesthesia
                                     on the surgical field during endoscopic sinus surgery. Am J Rhinol 2005; 19:514–20.

===== PAGE 235 =====
External Sinus Surgery       235

                   EXTERNAL SINUS SURGERY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Transfacial approaches to the paranasal sinuses include a transoral sublabial approach to the max-
                   illary sinus and pterygomaxillary space (Caldwell-Luc), external ethmoidectomy (often with medial orbitotomy
                   and/or medial maxillectomy), and osteoplastic approaches to the frontal sinus via a bicoronal incision just behind

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                   the hairline. The usual indication for such approaches are resection of malignant and occasionally benign locally

                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   extensive tumors such as angiofibroma, especially when for technical reasons (e.g., angle of access or extension into
                   the orbit) it is felt that an endoscopic approach is not indicated. The continued improvement in endoscopic equip-
                   ment along with increasing surgical experience makes endoscopic resection increasingly more common, safe, and
                   appropriate.
                   Anterior cranial base surgery: When tumors transgress the anterior cranial base at the cribriform plate and eth-
                   moid roof, an anterior cranial base resection is often done. If the extent of the anticipated dural resection is limited,
                   then the resection can be accomplished endoscopically. In more extensive resections most surgeons opt for an open
                   approach. Rarely is a central facial incision required as adequate exposure may be obtained via a bicoronal incision
                   and bifrontal craniotomy. The CSF leak is addressed by a combination of dural substitution (autologous tissue, such
                   as temporalis fascia, bovine pericardium, or manufactured substitutes) and a pericranial-galeal flap. A lumbar sub-
                   arachnoid drain is sometimes used in this setting.

                               Figure 3-11. Diagrammatic representation of the relationships of the orbit, maxillary
                               antrum, ethmoid labyrinth, and nasal cavity. Note that the medial wall of the ethmoid
                               labyrinth is an upper extension of the attachment of the middle turbinate. The
                               attachment of the upper extension separates the roof of the ethmoid and the cribriform
                               plate. (Reproduced with permission from Montgomery WW: Surgery of the Upper
                               Respiratory System, 3rd edition. Williams & Wilkins, 1996.)

===== PAGE 236 =====
236   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Variant approaches: Approaches to the middle cranial base include an orbitozygomatic approach to the infratem-
                                poral fossa. The zygomatic arch and part of the zygomatic body is temporarily removed, the temporalis major muscle
                                is transposed inferiorly. The lateral orbital bone with or without the orbital rim may be temporarily removed. A mid-
                                dle fossa craniotomy or craniectomy is usually done. This provides access to the foramen ovale, foramen rotundum,
                                and carotid artery at the skull base, as well as the lateral orbit and superior infratemporal fossa and pterygomaxillary
                                fossa to the pterygoid plates, and, as needed, lateral sphenoid sinus and maxillary sinus. Following tumor resection,
                                part of the temporalis muscle may be used to assist in CSF leak management.
                                Usual preoperative diagnosis: Malignant and some benign tumors
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                         External Sinus Surgery                     Anterior Cranial Base Surgery

                                 Position                Head up 30°, back raised (reduces          ⇐ Also reduces intracranial pressure
                                                         bleeding)

                                 Incision                Access to the ethmoid and maxilla is via   A bicoronal incision posterior to the hairline masks the
                                                         a 3–4 cm incision midway between the       scar. A supplemental facial incision is rarely needed.
                                                         medial canthal ligament and the midline,
                                                         in the shadow of the nasal bone; a lat-
                                                         eral rhinotomy incision is not needed.

                                 Special                 Paranasal sinus set; headlight             ⇐ + craniotomy set
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Nasal packing                              ⇐ see frontal craniotomy
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g                              ⇐

                                 Surgical time           1.5–4 h                                    5–8 h

                                 EBL                     25–300 mL                                  150–750 mL

                                 Postop care             Same as endoscopic surgery                 Same as craniotomy

                                 Mortality               Very rare                                  Rare

                                 Morbidity               Bleeding: < 5%                             Anosmia if bifrontal craniotomy
                                                                                                    CSF leak: < 2%
                                                                                                    CVA: <1%
                                                                                                    Bone flap loss: < 1%
                                                                                                    Meningitis: < 1%
                                                                                                    Infection: < 1%

                                 Pain score              4–6                                        4–6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                  Children–seniors

                                 Male:Female                1:1

                                 Incidence                  Common

                                 Etiology                   Malignant tumors, selected benign tumors, occasionally infectious

                                 Associated conditions      Dependent on specific tumor; also see Endoscopic Sinus Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Endoscopic Sinus Surgery, p. 233.

===== PAGE 237 =====
Nasal Surgery (Rhinoplasty, Septoplasty, Septorhinoplasty)         237

                   NASAL SURGERY (RHINOPLASTY, SEPTOPLASTY,
                   SEPTORHINOPLASTY)
                   Sam P. Most

                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                   Description: Nasal surgery is performed for cosmetic and functional restoration of the airway. Functional restoration
                   is usually performed for either congenital or posttraumatic deviations of the septum. The nasal cavity is first cocain-
                   ized with 4% cocaine-soaked pledgets placed in each nostril for 5–10 min. Septoplasty (reconstruction of the nasal
                   septum) usually can be carried out under sedation with local anesthesia, using 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine.
                   Rhinoplasty-septorhinoplasty usually is carried out under local anesthesia, but if GA is used, a mouth pack is inserted.
                   Local infiltration with 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine is used to ensure vasoconstriction and to minimize
                   bleeding. Intranasal incisions are made and septal problems corrected. Generally, an anterior hemitransfixion incision
                   is made down to the cartilage, and a submucoperichondrial flap is elevated the length of the septum. A similar flap may
                   be elevated on the contralateral side. Bony deformities are resected with an osteotome, whereas cartilaginous deformi-
                   ties are either resected or weakened by morselizing, either in situ or after removal, and then replaced. The incision is
                   closed with interrupted absorbable sutures. In rhinoplasty, tip remodelling, hump reduction, and bony osteotomies are
                   performed to remodel the nasal contour. Surgery on the inferior turbinates in the form of intramural cautery, resection
                   of turbinate bone, resection of turbinate mucosa or, in some cases, complete turbinectomy may be required to produce
                   a satisfactory airway. After the surgery is complete, both nasal cavities are packed and external splints may be used for
                   rhinoplasty and septorhinoplasty cases. For the plastic surgeon’s perspective see Chapter 11.1.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nasal deformity or deviation; deviated septum

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Head up 30° to reduce bleeding. Table may be turned 90–180°.

                     Incision               Intranasal, usually; extended only in open septorhinoplasty

                     Unique                 Nose initially cocainized; use of 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine to ↓ bleeding
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv; routinely used as long as nasal packs are in place.

                     Surgical time          1–2.5 h

                     Closing                Nose often packed postop, necessitating oral airway after extubation.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    50–100 mL (excessive blood loss rare)

                     Postop care            PACU

                     Mortality              Minimal

                     Morbidity              Septal perforation: 5%
                                            Bleeding: 4%
                                            Infection: 4%

                     Pain score             4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Young teens–young adults

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common

                     Etiology               Congenital/traumatic septal and/or nasal deviation

===== PAGE 238 =====
238   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Facial Plastic Surgery
                                Overview: Facial plastic surgery encompasses both reconstructive and aesthetic surgery of the face and neck. Typi-
                                cally, surgeons are trained in either otolaryngology-head & neck surgery/facial plastic surgery or general plastic sur-
                                gery (see Chapter 11.1) or both. The procedures to be covered in this section are rhinoplasty, rhytidectomy (facelift),
                                and blepharoplasty (eyelid rejuvenation).
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
    Otolaryngology—

                                Rhinoplasty
                                Description: Rhinoplasty has traditionally been considered an aesthetic procedure. However, when combined with
                                a septoplasty (rhinoseptoplasty, septorhinoplasty) it is both a functional and aesthetic operation. In some cases, a
                                purely functional operation (functional rhinoplasty) is performed to improve the ability to breathe through the nose.
                                The approach and anesthetic requirements for these can be considered together.
                                Technique: A septoplasty involves a unilateral intranasal incision along the anterior septum with minor variations in
                                the placement of the incision in the antero-posterior plane. The approaches to rhinoplasty can be intranasal, extranasal or
                                both. Frequently, the external (or “open”) approach to rhinoplasty is employed. The intranasal approach involve incisions
                                along the septum anteriorly and some combination of incisions in the nasal vestibule. The external approach combines
                                these approaches with a midcolumellar incision. In both functional and aesthetic rhinoplasty, the maneuvers include car-
                                tilage remodeling or resection, and possibly osteotomies to manipulate the bony pyramid of the nose.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: For aesthetic patients, the typical preop diagnosis is nasal deformity. However, many pa-
                                tients also complain of nasal obstruction, and some rhinoplasty patients have purely functional concerns. Patients
                                with significant nasal obstruction may have some component of sleep disordered breathing or even OSA. Because
                                of this, patients with nasal obstruction are routinely asked about snoring and daytime somnolence (if they have not
                                already had a diagnostic sleep study).
                                Preop and intraop preparation: Preoperatively patients receive a nasal decongestant spray (0.05% oxymetazoline
                                spray, 3 doses 10 min apart) to reduce intraop bleeding. Preop corticosteroid (4–8 mg Decadron iv) and antibiotics
                                (cefazolin, 1 g iv) are administered. Intraop, we prefer LMA for protection of the airway and esophageal inlet, as some
                                bleeding in the nasopharynx is expected. If an endotracheal tube is used, a throat pack can be placed to reduce blood
                                entrance into the esophagus/stomach. The tube should be secured to the midline of the lower lip to avoid distortion
                                of the nose/nasal base.
                                Postop care: At the end of the procedure, prior to extubation, the surgeon will place an external splint of some type
                                on the nose. Any mask placed on the patient should be done in such a fashion as to not place pressure on the nose.
                                We prefer the transport oxygen mask be cut off such that no contact occurs. Any Valsalva can result in epistaxis and/
                                or bleeding under the septal or nasal skin flaps. Thus, any manuevers to reduce bucking or coughing during extuba-
                                tion are in order.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine

                                 Incision                 Intranasal + columella (external rhinoplasty)

                                 Special                  Headlight
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   Nasal obstruction postop
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics              Often administered preop: cefazolin 1 g iv

                                 Other preoperative       Nasal decongestant spray, dexamethasone 4–8 mg iv
                                   meds

                                 Surgical time            1–3 h

===== PAGE 239 =====
Facial Plastic Surgery      239

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     EBL                     25–50 mL

                     Mortality               Minimal

                     Morbidity               Epistaxis, septal perforation, unsatisfactory aesthetic result

                     Pain score              1–4, typically mild

                                                                                                                                                             Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                               Otolaryngology—
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               15+ yr

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                Nasal obstruction, desire for change in nasal form.

                   Rhytidectomy (Facelift)
                   Description: Rhytidectomy (facelift) is almost always an aesthetic procedure. In the common vernacular, “facelift” is
                   often used to describe total surgical facial rejuvenation (including eyelids and forehead). Strictly speaking, rhytidec-
                   tomy involves aesthetic improvement of the lower half of the face and upper neck. For this reason, some have called
                   it a “necklift” or “lower facelift” to avoid confusion. Perhaps the latter term is more appropriate, as a separate ‘necklift’
                   procedure does exist. In any event, the anesthetic requirements for these are similar.
                   Technique: Rhytidectomy incisions are bilateral, extending pre and postauricularly with minor variations. In ad-
                   dition, the surgeon may place a small (0.5–2 cm) incision submentally for access to submental fat and/or platysma
                   muscle. As dissection may be near branches of the facial nerve, avoidance of muscle relaxants is required.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: For aesthetic patients, the typical preop diagnosis is simply desire for reduction in nasolabial
                   and labiomandibular lines, jowling, and neck skin laxity. Patients are typically over the age of 40 and usually in good
                   health. Smoking is a contraindication due to the risk of poor wound healing and/or skin flap necrosis.
                   Preop and intraop preparation: Preop patients receive corticosteroid (4–8 mg Decadron iv) and antibiotics
                   (cefazolin, 1 g iv). Intraop, we prefer LMA for protection of the airway and esophageal inlet, though an ETT can be
                   used. The tube should be secured to the midline of the lower lip to avoid distortion of the lower face/neck. The tube is
                   prepped in to the field and may be manipulated side-to-side during the procedure as the submental incision is accessed.
                   In addition, the head may be turned about 30–45° to the side opposite the surgeon. Typically, dissection near the
                   branches of the facial nerve is undertaken, and visual monitoring for any twitches is performed by the assistant, thus
                   avoidance of muscle relaxants is imperative.
                   Postop care: At the end of the procedure, prior to patient extubation, the surgeon will place a circumferential external
                   pressure dressing of some kind on the face. Typically, cotton balls soaked in antibiotic ointment are placed in the ears.
                   The patient may have difficulty hearing due to this dressing. Drains may have been placed on each side of the neck. Any
                   Valsalva can result in bleeding under the skin flaps. Hematoma is one of the most common periop complications and
                   requires evacuation. Thus, any maneuvers to reduce bucking or coughing during extubation are in order.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Pre or postauricular and submental

                     Special                 Headlight
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Facial nerve is monitored (visually); avoid paralytics.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Often administered preop: cefazolin 1 g iv

===== PAGE 240 =====
240   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Other preoperative     Dexamethasone: 4–8 mg iv
                                   meds

                                 Surgical Time          3h

                                 EBL                    25–50 mL

                                 Mortality              Minimal
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                 Morbidity              Hematoma, facial paralysis, unsatisfactory aesthetic result

                                 Pain Score             1–4, typically mild

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range              40+

                                 Male:Female            1:8

                                 Incidence              Common

                                 Etiology               Desire for change in facial aesthetics

                                 Associated             Other facial aesthetic considerations
                                   conditions

                                Blepharoplasty
                                (For the plastic surgeon’s perspective see Chapter 11.1)
                                Description: Blepharoplasty (eyelid rejuvenation surgery) is, in the overwhelming marjority of cases, an anesthetic
                                procedure. In some cases, functional upper lid blepharoplasty may be performed to reduce visual field obstruction
                                and is typically covered by insurance. These procedures are often performed under local anesthesia with sedation.
                                However, as they are often combined with other procedures (browlift, facelift), the patients are often under general
                                anesthesia.
                                Technique: Upper blepharoplasty incisions are placed on curvilinear fashion along the upper eyelid creases with
                                minor variations. The amount of skin to be excised is marked by the surgeon, and local anesthetic with epinephrine is
                                administered. The evolution of upper eyelid blepharoplasty has led to a more conservative approach with less muscle
                                and fat excision being performed. As the procedure becomes more skin-only, many are being performed under local
                                anesthesia as an isolated procedure.
                                Lower blepharoplasty is generally performed transcutaneously with a subciliary incision or transconjunctivally via
                                the inner portion of the lower eyelid. In the former approach, a small amount of lower lid skin and muscle is typically
                                excised. With both approaches, the surgeon removes or repositions a small amount of the intraorbital fat pockets for
                                the desired aesthetic result.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: For aesthetic patients, the typical preop diagnosis is simply desire for reduction upper lid
                                skin excess, which may obstruct their vision (see above). In the lower lid, the most common complaint is “puffiness”
                                of the lower eyelid, which is often due to pseudoherniation of orbital fat and descent of the midface fat with age.
                                Patients are typically over the age of 30 and usually in good health.
                                Preop and intraop preparation: Preop patients receive corticosteroid (4–8 mg Decadron iv) and antibiotics
                                (cefazolin, 1 g iv). Intraop, we prefer LMA for protection of the airway and esophageal inlet. The tube should be
                                 secured to the midline of the lower lip to avoid distortion of the lower face/neck.
                                Postop care: At the end of the procedure, prior to patient extubation, the surgeon will confirm satisfaction with
                                symmetry and aesthetic result. No dressings are used. Any Valsalva can result in bleeding under the skin flaps. More
                                important, intraorbital pressure must be avoided as it may result in a serious complication, placing the patient’s
                                vision at risk. Thus, any maneuvers to reduce bucking or coughing during extubation are in order.

===== PAGE 241 =====
Facial Plastic Surgery    241

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position              Supine

                     Incision              Upper lid crease, lower lid via transconjunctival or transcutaneous approaches

                     Special               None
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                None

                                                                                                                                                         Head and Neck Surgery
                       considerations

                                                                                                                                                           Otolaryngology—
                     Antibiotics           Often administered preop: cefazolin 1 g iv

                     Other preoperative    Dexamethasone: 4–8 mg iv
                       meds

                     Surgical time         1.25 h (upper or lower only); 2 h (both upper and lower)

                     EBL                   < 5 mL

                     Mortality             Minimal

                     Morbidity             Asymmetry, dry eye, ectropion, corneal abrasion, blindness (rare)

                     Pain score            1–4, typically mild

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             30+

                     Male:Female           1:8

                     Incidence             Common

                     Etiology              Desire for change in facial aesthetics; in some cases upper blepharoplasty is performed for func-
                                           tional reasons

                     Associated            Other facial aesthetic considerations
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR FACIAL COSMETIC
                         SURGERY (NASAL SURGERY, RHYTIDECTOMY, AND
                         BLEPHAROPLASTY)
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   These cases typically are performed on an outpatient basis. Most of the patients are young and otherwise healthy,
                   but some patients presenting for rhino/septoplasty and turbinate reduction surgery may have OSA with the cor-
                   responding implications for intraop management (see p. 265). Older patients may present for major reconstructive
                   nasal surgery following resections of a basal cell carcinoma of the nose. Patients presenting for closed reduction of
                   nasal fractures may have suffered concomitant closed head trauma. If the nose injury is recent, blood may have been
                   swallowed, and the patient should be considered “full stomach.”

                   Patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) and those with rheumatologic diseases may be particularly prone to bruising,
                   infection, and delayed healing. The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs), aspirin, and
                    certain herbal supplements, such as gingko or echinacea, and certain vitamins (e.g., vitamin E) should be stopped at
                     least two weeks prior to surgery to avoid the risk of excessive microvascular bleeding.

===== PAGE 242 =====
242   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Respiratory             Some patients may present with a Hx of reactive airway disease; their functional status
                                                        should be checked and optimized preop. Increased airway reactivity may provoke excessive
                                                        postop coughing and straining, increasing the risk of bleeding.
                                                        Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular           Special attention should be directed to the presence of HTN, which may predispose the patients
                                                         to hematoma formation. HTN should be well controlled preop. In patients with p         reexisting
                                                        cardiac disease, cocaine for topical anesthesia or control of bleeding may be contraindicated.
                                                         Tests: ECG in older population; others as indicated from H&P
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                Neuro                   Psychological disturbances are common in patients presenting for rhinologic surgery.

                                Premedication           Standard premedication (p. B-1). Sedation should be avoided or used with caution in pa-
                                                        tients with OSA.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: The anesthetic plan should provide for patient immobility, smooth emergence from anes-
                                thesia, a rapid return of consciousness, prevention of PONV, and fast-tracking patients for discharge. A wide variety
                                of office-based cosmetic procedures, including rhinoplasty, rhytidectomy, blepharoplasty can be performed either
                                under local anesthesia with iv sedation or GA. The choice is frequently dictated by the patient’s desires and the
                                surgeon’s level of comfort. MAC removes the triggers for malignant hyperthermia (MH) GA-induced emergence
                                phenomena, reduces the incidence of PONV and facilitates patient discharge; however, administration of a success-
                                ful MAC without immediate access to the patient’s airway is frequently more challenging than conducting GA. With
                                MAC, FiO2 must not exceed 0.3 to prevent intraop fire.

                                Induction                 Standard induction with propofol (1–2 mg/kg) is an ideal induction agent because of its short
                                                          duration and intrinsic antiemetic effect. For GETA, the use of an oral RAE or reinforced ETT
                                                          will facilitate surgical access. Spontaneous or controlled ventilation can be used, and FLMA is
                                                          strongly preferred over tracheal intubation (see Introduction, p. 178).
                                                          Both ETT and FLMA are usually taped midline.

                                Maintenance               All GA techniques (balanced, inhalational, or TIVA) can be used safely, although TIVA is
                                                          preferred. Propofol infusion (80–150 mcg/kg/min) may offer the advantage of ↓ BP with-
                                                          out compensatory ↑ HR, and ↓ PONV. Remifentanil infusion (0.1–0.25 mcg/kg/min) will
                                                          improve hemodynamic stability and facilitate rapid and smooth emergence. Maintaining
                                                          moderate degree of ↓ BP is essential.

                                Emergence                 Aggressive prevention of PONV, usually with iv 5-HT3 antagonist (e.g., ondansetron
                                                          4–8 mg) in combination with iv dexamethasone (8–10 mg) is highly effective and may
                                                          lead to improved patient outcome. An iv dexamethasone is administered routinely dur-
                                                          ing facial cosmetic surgery. Multimodal PONV prophylaxis (e.g., the addition of trans-
                                                          dermal scopolamine patch) is warranted in high-risk patients. Avoidance of bucking and
                                                          coughing on emergence, and accompanying hypertensive responses, is essential for pre-
                                                          venting microvascular bleeding and hematoma formation, especially after rhinoplasty
                                                          and rhytidectomy.
                                                          Emergence from anesthesia after nasal surgery presents significant challenges to the an-
                                                          esthesiologist. Nasal passages may be packed at the end of surgery, making the patients
                                                          obligate mouth-breathers; the oropharynx should be suctioned carefully. No pressure
                                                          on the patient’s nose with the face mask should be allowed after tracheal extubation or
                                                          FLMA removal. Full return of airway reflexes should occur before extubation, which
                                                          must be accomplished smoothly without excessive bucking and coughing. The FLMA is
                                                          superior to the ETT in this regard.

                                Blood and fluid           Blood loss usually minimal                Blood loss controlled with surgical hemostasis and
                                   requirements           IV: 20 ga × 1                             topical applications of vasoconstrictor (epineph-
                                                          NS/LR @ 2–3 mL/kg/h                       rine), but also may include cocaine.

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)

===== PAGE 243 =====
Facial Plastic Surgery        243

                    Positioning                  Head elevated 15–30°                        Patient’s arms usually tucked in and should be
                                                 Table turned 90–180°                        carefully padded. The eyes are usually protected by
                                                 3 and pad pressure points                   the surgeon according to surgeon’s preference.
                                                 3 eyes

                    Complications                Tachycardia, dysrhythmias                   These are usually related to use of vasoconstrictor
                                                                                             agents and may present a problem in patients with
                                                                                             CAD. Short-acting β-blocker (esmolol, 0.5–1 mcg/
                                                                                             kg in boluses) should be available to blunt these he-

                                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                             modynamic effects.

                                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                                                 Laryngospasm, negative pressure             Treatment is supportive: reestablishment of airway
                                                 pulmonary edema                             patency, oxygen supplementation, ventilatory sup-
                                                                                             port (CPAP, or tracheal intubation with positive
                                                                                             pressure ventilation and PEEP), management of
                                                                                             fluid shifts, and maintenance of normal intravas-
                                                                                             cular volume.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications                Occult bleeding                             Occult postop bleeding may cause the patient to
                                                                                             swallow large quantities of blood (↑ aspiration
                                                                                             risk); and repacking the nostrils may be required.
                                                                                             Adequate prophylaxis of hypertensive responses
                                                                                             postop (iv bolus doses of labetalol, 0.1-0.2 mg·kg−1)
                                                                                             and PONV are essential.

                    Pain                         Fentanyl 25–50 mcg iv
                      management                 prn is usually sufficient

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Abdulatif M: Sodium nitroprusside induced hypotension: haemodynamic response and dose requirements during propofol
                        or halothane anaesthesia. Anaesth Intens Care 1994; 22:155–60.
                     2. Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, et al: Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea and vomiting after ambulatory surgery?
                        Anesthesiology 2012; 117:475–86.
                     3. Beer GM, Goldscheider E, Weber A, et al: Prevention of acute hematoma after face-lifts. Aesthetic Plast Surg 2010; 34:502–7.
                     4. Bitar G, Mullis W, Jacobs W, et al: Safety and efficacy of office-based surgery with monitored anesthesia care/sedation in 4778
                        consecutive plastic surgery procedures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2003; 111:150–6.
                     5. Blake DR: Office-based anesthesia: dispelling common myths. Aesthet Surg J 2008; 28:564–70.
                     6. Caloss R, Lard MD: Anesthesia for office-based facial cosmetic surgery. Atlas Oral Maxillofacial Surg Clin N Am 2004;
                        12:163–77.
                     7. Chuang YC, Wang CH, Lin YS: Negative pressure pulmonary edema: report of three cases and review of the literature. Eur
                        Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2007; 264:1113–6.
                     8. Clevens RA: Avoiding patient dissatisfaction and complications in facelift surgery. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 2009;
                        17:515–30.
                     9. Friedberg BL: Propofol-ketamine technique: dissociative anesthesia for office surgery (a 5-year review of 1264 cases). Aesthetic
                        Plast Surg 1999; 23:70–5.
                    10. Hinni ML, Kern EB: Psychological complications of septo-rhinoplasty. Facial Plast Surg 1997; 13:71–5.
                    11. Hoefflin SM, Bornstein JB, Gordon M: General anesthesia in an office-based plastic surgical facility: a report on more than
                        23,000 consecutive office-based procedures under general anesthesia with no significant anesthetic complications. Plast
                        Reconstr Surg 2001; 107:243–51.
                    12. Kolodzie K, Apfel CC: Nausea and vomiting after office-based anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22:532–8.
                    13. Liu YH, Li MJ, Wang PC, et al: Use of dexamethasone on the prophylaxis of nausea and vomiting after tympanomastoid
                        surgery. Laryngoscope 2001; 111:1271–4.
                    14. Mamiya H, Ichinohe T, Kaneko Y: Negative pressure pulmonary edema after oral and maxillofacial surgery. Anesth Prog 2009;
                        56:49–52.
                    15. Niamtu J: Expanding hematoma in face-lift surgery: literature review, case presentations, and caveats. Dermatol Surg 2005;
                        31:1134–44.
                    16. Prendiville S, Weiser S: Management of anesthesia and facility in facelift surgery. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 2009;
                        17:531–8.
                    17. Steely RL, Collins DR Jr, Cohen BE, et al: Postoperative nausea and vomiting in the plastic surgery patient. Aesthetic Plast
                        Surg 2004; 28:29–32.

===== PAGE 244 =====
244   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                 18. Taub PJ, Bashey S, Hausman LM: Anesthesia for cosmetic surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010; 125:1e–7e.
                                 19. Van Den Berg AA, Savva D, Honjol NM, et al: Comparison of total intravenous, balanced inhalational and combined intravenous-
                                     inhalational anaesthesia for tympanoplasty, septorhinoplasty and adenotonsillectomy. Anaesth Intens Care 1995; 23:574–82.
                                 20. Webster AC, Morley-Foster PK, Janzen V, et al: Anesthesia for intranasal surgery: a comparison between tracheal intubation
                                     and the flexible reinforced laryngeal mask airway. Anesth Analg 1999; 88:421–5.
                                 21. Westreich R, Sampson I, Shaari CM, et al: Negative-pressure pulmonary edema after routine septorhinoplasty: discussion of
                                     pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention. Arch Facial Plast Surg 2006; 8:8–15.
                                 22. Williams PJ, Thompsett C, Bailey PM: Comparison of the reinforced laryngeal mask airway and tracheal intubation for nasal
                                     surgery. Anaesthesia 1995; 50:987–9.
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                    OTHER ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR FACIAL
    Otolaryngology—

                                    COSMETIC SURGERY
                                (see Anesthetic Considerations for Office-based procedures (p. 878) and Anesthetic Considerations for Facial
                                Cosmetic Surgery p. 879)

                                OTOLOGY AND NEUROTOLOGY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Otologic Surgery: Otologic surgery is indicated for a spectrum of disorders, including traumatic, developmental,
                                infectious, and neoplastic disease. Procedures involving the external auditory canal, middle ear, and inner ear will
                                be considered in this section. Surgery confined to the pinna or that requiring craniotomy is considered elsewhere.
                                The temporal bone is as complex as any region of human anatomy (Figs. 3-12 and 3-13). Multiple vital neurovascular
                                structures interrelate in a small confined space. These include the organs of hearing and balance, the facial nerve,
                                the carotid artery, jugular vein, and the delicate mechanisms of the middle ear. The density and complexity of the
                                anatomy dictate the delicate nature of otologic procedures and hence many of its anesthetic requirements. Most
                                procedures are either performed via a transcanal approach (through the natural meatus of the external ear), a retro-
                                auricular incision, or a combination of the two.
                                Many otologic procedures are undertaken to control recurrent or chronic ear infections (otomastoiditis). The simplest
                                of these is the myringotomy, in which the tympanic membrane (TM) is incised through the ear canal, and the middle
                                ear contents are aspirated. In most cases, a myringotomy tube is also placed to maintain middle ear aeration and drain-
                                age. This procedure usually takes just a few minutes and is performed under mask GA. A myringoplasty involves the

                                                                                      Temporal Lobe
                                                                                      Semicircular
                                                                                                   Cochlea       Petrous
                                                                                        Canals
                                                                                                                  Apex
                                                                                Ossicles                      Pons

                                                                                Mastoid                             Eighth
                                                                                Air Cells                           Nerve
                                                                             Tympanic            TC              Medulla
                                                                             Membrane                    Internal
                                                                                                         Auditory
                                                                                    Jugular
                                                                                                          Canal
                                                                                     Bulb                    Eustachian
                                                                                                                Tube
                                                                                    Jugular             Carotid
                                                                                     Vein               Artery

                                                                     Figure 3-12. Coronal diagram of right ear.

===== PAGE 245 =====
Otology and Neurotology     245

                                                                                           Geniculate
                                                       Semicircular                         Ganglion Greater
                                                         Canals                      Malleus          Superficial
                                                                             Incus
                                                                                                       Petrosal
                                                                                                        Nerve
                                                  Sigmoid
                                                   Sinus                                            Condyle
                                                            Facial

                                                                                                                                                        Head and Neck Surgery
                                                            Nerve

                                                                                                                                                          Otolaryngology—
                                                                                              Eustachian
                                                        Endolymphatic                           Tube
                                                                              Jugular
                                                            Sac
                                                                               Bulb

                                                                             Jugular     Carotid
                                                            Mastoid          Vein        Artery
                                                            Tip

                                                      Figure 3-13. Lateral diagram of right ear.

                   repair of a persistent TM perforation and usually involves placement of autologous tissues as a patch to enable healing.
                   When combined with repair of chronic middle ear changes, the procedure is termed a tympanoplasty.
                   The mastoid is an area of bone and air spaces situated behind the middle ear and external auditory canal. The removal
                   of this bone, through a simple mastoidectomy, enables the removal of loculated infection and diseased tissue and
                   provides access to additional anatomy. This is often combined with tympanoplasty (tympanomastoidectomy) to
                   address the changes from chronic infection. This is the standard surgical approach to resect a cholesteatoma, which
                    is a keratin-containing epithelial cyst originating from the TM that has grown into the middle ear and mastoid cavity.
                    When the posterior bony wall of the external auditory canal is left in place to keep the mastoid cavity anatomically
                    distinct from the external auditory canal, the procedure is called a canal-wall-up tympanomastoidectomy. In con-
                    trast, for more aggressive disease, the partition between the external canal and the mastoid cavity can be removed,
                    thereby exteriorizing the mastoid cavity in what is termed a canal-wall-down tympanomastoidectomy. During this
                    procedure, the external auditory canal meatus should also be enlarged to accommodate the resulting mastoid bowl.
                    The complete removal of mastoid and middle ear contents is sometimes referred to as a radical mastoidectomy.
                    Tympanomastoid surgery is usually performed under GA and may take several hours to complete.
                   Surgery is often performed to improve the mechanical conduction of sound vibrations through the middle ear into
                   the inner ear (“conductive hearing loss”). If the cause of the mechanical dysfunction is not clear, the surgeon may
                   perform an exploratory tympanotomy, during which the TM is elevated and the middle ear structures are inspected
                   and palpated to reveal deficits in their function. Ossicular chain reconstruction involves rebuilding or replacing
                   the bones of hearing (malleus, incus, and stapes) with either the patient’s own tissues or with aloplastic prostheses.
                   Otosclerosis is a disorder characterized by the progressive fixation of the stapes to the surrounding bone, resulting in
                   hearing loss. One option for affected patients is to perform a stapedectomy (or stapedotomy) in which the stapes is
                   replaced by a prosthesis to restore more normal continuity of sound conduction. This procedure can be performed
                   either under local or general anesthesia. It involves extreme accuracy for success and can be one of the most chal-
                   lenging cases for the otologic surgeon.
                   Cochlear implantation is an option to address severe or profound inner ear hearing loss (“sensorineural hearing
                   loss”). During implantation, a retroauricular incision and mastoidectomy are performed to provide a pathway for
                   device placement into the inner ear. A receiver-stimulator is placed under the skin behind the ear, and a flexible
                   electrode array is threaded into the turns of the cochlea to later be used to stimulate the cochlear nerve directly, and
                   thereby bypass the dysfunctional inner ear. The devices are activated usually several weeks following placement, at
                   which time hearing function is expected to increase.
                   A number of procedures address disorders specifically confined to the external auditory canal. Patients may develop
                   extra bone growths (exostoses) in the ear canal that obstruct the canal. Exostoses resection can be performed through a

===== PAGE 246 =====
246   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                retroauricular incision or via a transcanal approach if the disease is limited. Patients may lack an ear canal (canal atresia) as
                                the result of a congenital disorder, from chronic inflammation, or posttraumatic scarring. In such patients, a canalplasty,
                                involving obstructing skin, bone, and scar can be performed. Similarly, patients may require the resection of a number of
                                neoplastic lesions of the ear canal, most commonly of cutaneous origin. Such resections may require additional resection
                                of adjacent tissues affected by the neoplastic process. A skin graft may be used to reconstruct the external auditory canal.
                                This may be harvested from the retroauricular region, the inner aspect of the arm, or from the hip or thigh.
                                The majority of otologic surgery requires the use of a surgical microscope. The presence of the microscope has a number
                                of implications for anesthesia. Often, the OR table is turned 180°. Of critical importance is that the patient remain entirely
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                motionless. Any adjustment of equipment or position can have profound consequences during microdissection. There-
    Otolaryngology—

                                fore, the surgeon must be made aware of any plans that may result in patient motion–even those that would otherwise
                                seem insignificant. During microsurgery, even small amounts of bleeding can have dramatic implications, thus mainte-
                                nance of a stable low blood pressure is useful.
                                One common theme to otologic procedures is the need to identify and preserve the facial nerve. The 7th cranial nerve
                                winds its way through the temporal bone from its origin in the brainstem to the stylomastoid foramen. It passes through
                                the middle ear and is at risk during almost all otologic procedures. The use of an EMG-based neural monitor is now com-
                                monplace to assess neural function. The monitor will not function if paralytic agents are in use, and their untimely use
                                can prevent the surgeon from receiving critical warnings regarding nerve activity. As a standard rule, always check with
                                the surgeon prior to the administration of any paralytic agents during otologic procedures.
                                Although the internal carotid artery and jugular bulb pass through the middle ear, significant vascular injury is
                                quite rare. Most if not all bleeding can be readily controlled with packing in the surgical field. The use of absorb-
                                able gelatin sponges (e.g., Gelfoam) is routine to hold reconstructive materials in place and also can help with he-
                                mostasis. Venous injury, such as laceration of the sigmoid sinus during mastoidectomy, can usually be controlled
                                using bone wax or with other hemostatic materials (e.g., Surgicel) held with pressure against the site of bleeding.
                                In the case of a large venous injury, a venous air embolism can potentially result, and timely communication be-
                                tween the surgical and anesthesia teams can facilitate its identification and treatment. More severe arterial injury
                                may require additional neuroradiologic or neurosurgical intervention. Even in these rare instances, hemodynamically
                                significant blood loss can usually be avoided with prompt and secure packing.
                                The temporal bone abuts the dura of the middle fossa above and the posterior fossa behind. Rarely, transgression
                                of the dura can result either as the result of pathology or from dissection of adjacent tissues. When this occurs, the
                                surgeon can usually close the leak using autologous tissues. The surgeon may request administration of a Valsalva
                                maneuver to check the integrity of the repair.

                                Usual preop diagnoses: Acute or chronic otitis media, cholesteatoma, hearing loss (conductive or sensorineural),
                                otosclerosis, aural atresia (acquired or congenital), tympanic membrane perforation, temporal bone fracture, tem-
                                poral bone neoplasm.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine

                                 Incision                 Postauricular or transcanal

                                 Special                  Binocular surgical microscope, otologic micro-instruments, otologic drill, laser
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   Complex microanatomy, no paralytics given need for facial nerve monitoring, possible avoidance
                                   considerations         of nitrous oxide

                                 Antibiotics              Often administered preoperatively

                                 Surgical time            < 1 h to > 4 h

                                 EBL                      Usually minimal

                                 Mortality                Minimal

                                 Morbidity                Infection, hearing loss, vertigo, facial nerve dysfunction, spinal fluid leak

                                 Pain score               1–6, typically mild

===== PAGE 247 =====
Otology and Neurotology       247

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             All ages

                     Male:Female           1:1

                     Incidence             Common

                     Etiology              Infectious, traumatic, congenital, neoplastic

                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                     Associated            Hearing loss, head trauma

                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for ear surgery are generally young and healthy, and most procedures are performed on an outpa-
                   tient basis. Communicating with these patients may be difficult 2° ↓hearing ability. Myringotomy and pressure equal-
                   ization (PE) tube insertion are very short procedures. In contrast, ossicular and tympanic membrane reconstruction
                   with facial nerve preservation may last several hours. Patients presenting for external ear reconstructions may have
                   associated congenital abnormalities, which should be considered preop.

                    Respiratory              Patients may present with Sx of concurrent URI including cough (See Anesthetic Consid-
                                             erations for Tonsillectomy, p. 209).
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P.

                    Cardiovascular           No special considerations.
                                             Tests: EKG in older population.

                    Neurological             Document brief neuro exam (including facial nerve function) and extent of any hearing
                                             loss

                    Premedication            Standard premedication (p. B-1).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA, often with moderate controlled hypotension.

                    Induction                Standard iv induction with propofol is used most often. If GETA is planned, a single intu-
                                             bating dose of an intermediate acting nondepolarizing NMB (e.g., rocuronium) is usually
                                             inconsequential with regard to intraop monitoring of the facial nerve. In the absence of
                                             contraindications, succinylcholine can also be safely administered for tracheal intubation.
                                             Coadministration of iv remifentanil bolus 3–4 µg/kg (or alfentanil 40–60 µg/kg) given
                                             over 90 sec, and propofol iv bolus 2–2.5 mg/kg, will provide excellent intubating condi-
                                             tions without the need for NMB in the majority of patients.
                                             PPV through the ETT or LMA are used most commonly, although spontaneous ventila-
                                             tion techniques can also be employed in selected patient.

                    Maintenance              Moderate ↓ BP (see Introduction, p. 178) may be requested. If an inhalational agent is
                                             used, N2O is best avoided. Inhalational anesthesia, balanced inhalational anesthesia,
                                             TIVA, and even combined propofol-inhalational anesthetics have all been successfully
                                             used for maintenance. Sevoflurane may be preferred for outpatient surgery: it improves
                                             the quality of postop patient recovery, shortens the discharge time, is associated with re-
                                             duced incidence of coughing and postop agitation compared to desflurane, and produces
                                             less somnolence and PONV compared to isoflurane.
                                             The use of an LMA in children undergoing myringotomy and PE tube placement may be as-
                                             sociated with ↓ incidence of intraop hypoxemia and better operating conditions as compared
                                             to the standard face mask technique. The second-generation LMA family of devices (LMA-
                                             Proseal™ or LMA-Supreme) will offer the greatest advantages (see Introduction, p. 178).

===== PAGE 248 =====
248   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Maintenance                   As the patient’s head is usually maintained in a fixed position (turned away from the sur-
                                  (cont’d)                    geon), the position of these devices remains stable.
                                                              A total intraoperative dose of fentanyl can be safely limited to 2–3 mcg/kg in the majority
                                                              of patients, especially when remifentanil is used intraoperatively.

                                Emergence                     At the end of the procedure, the patient’s head is moved during dressing application,
                                                              which may provoke gagging or bucking. Smooth emergence from anesthesia is mandatory.
                                                              The use of the LMA eliminates laryngeal stimulation and facilitates smooth emergence.
                                                              If postextubation laryngospasm occurs, the use of CPAP or face mask ventilation may be
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                              contraindicated, as it may unseat the tympanic membrane graft or disrupt other repairs.
    Otolaryngology—

                                                              Postoperative pain is usually mild-to-moderate, but may be minimal (e.g., laser stapedec-
                                                              tomy, tympanoplasty) or severe (e.g., radical mastoidectomy).

                                Blood and fluid               IV: 18–20 ga × 1                            Blood loss is usually minimal.
                                   requirements               NS/LR @ 3–4 mL/kg/h                         An IV is usually placed at the side where the sur-
                                                                                                          geon is positioned, to eliminate the possibility of
                                                                                                          triggering sudden surgical tremor during cuff
                                                                                                          inflation.

                                Control of                     Head-up position (10–15°), per             These special considerations are applicable to sur-
                                  bleeding                    surgeon’s preference                       gical procedures carried out under microscopic
                                                               Injection of epinephrine-containing       control, where even the smallest quantity of blood
                                                               solutions by surgeon                       may interfere with visualization.
                                                               Deliberate moderate ↓ BP

                                Monitoring                    Standard monitors (p. B-1).

                                Positioning                   3 and pad pressure points                   The LMA should be diligently secured midline.
                                                              3 eyes                                      Surgical drapes can usually be arranged in a way
                                                              3 opposite ear                              that allows the anesthesiologist limited access to
                                                                                                          the patient’s airway.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications                 PONV                                        Liberal prophylactic use of antiemetics is indicated.
                                                              Facial nerve injury

                                Pain                          Fentanyl (outpatient)                       The use of a PCA may be appropriate in older chil-
                                  management                  MSO4 (inpatient)                            dren and adults.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Dal D, Celiker V, Ozer E, et al: Induced hypotension for tympanoplasty: a comparison of desflurane, isoflurane and sevoflurane.
                                     Eur J Anaesthesiol 2004; 21:902–6.
                                  2. Degoute CS: Controlled hypotension: a guide to drug choice. Drugs 2007; 67:1053–76.
                                  3. Erhan E, Ugur G, Alper I, et al: Tracheal intubation without muscle relaxants: remifentanil or alfentanil in combination with
                                     propofol. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2003; 20:37–43.
                                  4. Gupta A, Stierer T, Zuckerman R, et al: Comparison of recovery profile after ambulatory anesthesia with propofol, isoflurane,
                                     sevoflurane and desflurane: a systematic review. Anesth Analg 2004; 98:632–41.
                                  5. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Avramov A, et al: Remifentanil-based anesthesia versus a propofol technique for otologic surgical
                                     procedures. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2000; 122:222–7.
                                  6. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Fahey K, et al: Comparison of 3 different anesthetic techniques on 24-hour recovery after otologic
                                     surgical procedures. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 120:406–11.
                                  7. Jellish WS, Owen K, Edelstein S, et al: Standard anesthetic technique for middle ear surgical procedures: a comparison of
                                     desflurane and sevoflurane. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005; 133:269–74.
                                  8. Liang S, Irwin MG: Review of anesthesia for middle ear surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28:519–28.
                                  9. Nekhendzy V: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery. In: Abdelmakak B, Doyle J, eds. Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic
                                     Surgery, Chapter 29. Cambridge University Press, New York: 2013.
                                 10. Richa F, Yazigi A, Sleilaty G, et al: Comparison between dexmedetomidine and remifentanil for controlled hypotension
                                     during tympanoplasty. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2008; 25:369–74.

===== PAGE 249 =====
Neurotological Skull Base Surgery           249

                    11. Ruby RF, Webster AC, Morley-Forster PK, Dain S: Laryngeal mask airway in paediatric otolaryngologic surgery. J Otolaryng
                        1995; 24:288–91.
                    12. Siddik-Sayyid SM, Taha SK, Kanazi GE, et al: Excellent intubating conditions with remifentanil-propofol and either low-dose
                        rocuronium or succinylcholine. Can J Anaesth 2009; 56:483–8.
                    13. White PF, Tang J, Wender RH, et al: Desflurane versus sevoflurane for maintenance of outpatient anesthesia: the effect on
                        early versus late recovery and perioperative coughing. Anesth Analg 2009; 109:387–93.

                                                                                                                                                                Head and Neck Surgery
                   Neurotological SKULL BASE SURGERY

                                                                                                                                                                  Otolaryngology—
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   The skull base refers to the floor of the cranial cavity and can be divided into anterior, middle, and posterior fossae.
                   It is formed by the frontal, ethmoid, sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones. Neurotologists primarily deal with
                   lesions in the posterior fossa, which is bordered by the clivus (anterior), temporal bone (lateral), and occipital bone
                   (posterior). An axial view of the skull identifying these structures is shown in Fig. 3-14.

                                                       7.8
                                                     PA
                                                   LAC

                                                Co

                                              GG

                                                                                                                            CI

                                         ME
                                                                                                                             5

                                      EAC
                                                                                                                             P

                                       M

                                        SCC

                                            CPA

                                                   SS
                                                     Cb
                                                          4V

                               Figure 3-14. An axial view of the skull through the level of the internal auditory canal
                               and cerebellopontine angle. 5, Trigeminal nerve; 7, facial nerve; 8, audiovestibular nerve;
                               PA, petrous apex; IAC, internal auditory canal; Co, cochlea; GG, geniculate ganglion
                               of the facial nerve; ME, middle ear; EAC, external auditory canal; M, mastoid air cell
                               system; SCC, semicircular canals; CPA, cerebellopontine angle; SS, sigmoid sinus;
                               4V, 4th ventricle; Cl, clivus; P, pons; Cb, cerebellum. (Republished with permission
                               from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996.
                               Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

===== PAGE 250 =====
250   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                                                                   SS                         SSCC
                                                                                                        CC
                                                                                                                        Co
                                                                                   PSCC
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                                                                                                                 Tentorium
                                                                                          VA                       SV
                                                                              JB                         IV
                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                JV            10 9         ES                                5
                                                                        11C                              8
                                                                  11S                               7
                                                                                                              BS
                                                                                    Ch         Fl
                                                               Cerebellum

                                          Figure 3-15. Anatomical relationships of the cerebellopontine angle shown
                                          through a retrosigmoid posterior fossa craniotomy. JV, jugular vein; JB, jugular
                                          bulb; SS, sigmoid sinus; 11s, spinal component of the accessory nerve; 11c, cranial
                                          component of the accessory nerve; 10, vagus nerve; 9, glossopharyngeal nerve; Ch,
                                          choroid plexus emanating from the lateral recess of the 4th ventricle; Fl, flocculus;
                                          BS, brainstem surface (pons); 5, trigeminal nerve; 7, facial nerve; 8, audiovestibular
                                          nerve; PA, porus acousticus; IV, inferior vestibular nerve; SV, superior vestibular nerve;
                                          ES, endolymphatic sac; VA, vestibular aqueduct; PSCC, posterior semicircular canal;
                                          CC, common crus; SSCC, superior semicircular canal; Co, cochlea. (Republished with
                                          permission from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery. Mosby, St.
                                          Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

                                The term skull base surgery is a misnomer as the majority of lesions treated are located adjacent to the brainstem
                                and not intrinsic to the skull base itself. Removal of the skull base bone allows exposure to these lesions while mini-
                                mizing cerebral and cerebellar retraction.
                                The cerebellopontine angle (CPA) is a fluid-filled space containing the facial nerve (VII) and vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)
                                coursing laterally toward the internal auditory canal. A depiction of the CPA and associated cranial nerves is shown in
                                Fig. 3-15. This is one of the most commonly approached areas in skull base surgery and lesions include vestibular schwan-
                                nomas (91.3%), meningiomas (3.1%), epidermoids (2.4%), nonvestibular schwannomas (1.4%), and arachnoid cysts (0.5%).
                                Vestibular schwannomas (also known as acoustic neuromas) are removed via three surgical approaches: translaby-
                                rinthine, retrosigmoid, and middle fossa. The translabyrinthine approach uses a postauricular incision to access the
                                temporal bone (Fig. 3-16). Retraction of the temporal lobe and cerebellum is minimized as the entire mastoid and
                                labyrinth are removed to create access. This approach results in complete sensorineural hearing loss and is most
                                commonly used in patients with large tumors and/or nonserviceable hearing. Patients with serviceable hearing
                                may elect for a hearing conservation approach for their tumors (retrosigmoid or middle fossa). The retrosigmoid
                                approach uses a more posterior craniotomy between the sigmoid and transverse sinuses. The cerebellum is re-
                                tracted posterior away from the petrous face of the temporal bone (Fig. 3-15). Disadvantages include the increased

===== PAGE 251 =====
Neurotological Skull Base Surgery       251

                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                   B

                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                                                              A                                C

                                                                                         F
                                                                                                          E

                                                             D

                               Figure 3-16. Typical left translabyrinthine posterior fossa craniotomy exposure of a
                               medium-sized tumor. Inferiorly, the lower cranial nerves (A) are visible, and the jugular
                               bulb (B) has been identified. Troughs have been drilled above and below the IAC, and the
                               dura (C) has been reflected off the tumor surface. The sigmoid sinus (D) and cerebellum
                               are gently retracted posteriorly. The trigeminal nerve (E) is located superiorly. The facial
                               nerve (F) takes a variable and often serpentine course across the medial side of the
                               tumor. (Republished with permission from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology and Skull
                               Base Surgery. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

                   incidence of postop headache and the need for rigid skull fixation (e.g., Mayfield). The middle fossa approach places
                   the craniotomy above the ear and requires retraction of the temporal lobe (Fig. 3-17). This approach has the highest
                   rate of hearing conservation, but can only be used in smaller tumors without increasing the risk of postop facial
                   palsy.
                   Another commonly approached area is the jugular foramen, which lies at the junction of the petrous apex and occipi-
                   tal bone. This foramen connects the intracranial compartment to the neck and contains the glossopharyngeal nerve
                   (IX), vagus nerve (X), accessory nerve (XI), jugular bulb, and inferior petrosal sinus. The most common tumors in
                   this area are paragangliomas. Paragangliomas are divided into two groups: (a) adrenal paragangliomas (also known
                   as pheochromocytomas) and (b) extraadrenal paragangliomas located in the abdomen, chest, and head and neck
                   regions. In the jugular foramen, these tumors are often referred to as glomus jugulare. Less common pathologies in
                   this area include meningiomas and lower cranial nerve schwannomas.
                   Glomus jugulare tumors are highly vascular, and patients undergo preop embolization before surgery. Two to
                   4 U of autologous or crossmatched blood are kept available depending on the size and extent of the tumor. Large-bore

===== PAGE 252 =====
252   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                          Figure 3-17. Middle fossa exposure of a small right-sided tumor. The retractor is
                                          engaged over the posterior lip of the petrous bone and retracts the temporal lobe.
                                          Bone has been removed around the IAC, and the dura has been opened to expose
                                          the tumor. The facial nerve typically courses across the superior aspect of the
                                          tumor surface. (Republished with permission from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology
                                          and Skull Base Surgery. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

                                ivs should be placed in case rapid transfusion is needed. In addition to a lateral craniotomy similar to the translaby-
                                rinthine approach, a limited neck dissection is performed to gain vascular control of the jugular vein and carotid
                                artery. This transjugular craniotomy exposes the entire jugular fossa and involves resection of the involved sigmoid
                                sinus and jugular vein (Fig. 3-18). New lower cranial nerve deficits occur in 25–50% of patients; therefore appropri-
                                ate airway and aspiration precautions must be taken. Rehabilitation often involves speech therapy and vocal cord
                                medialization. Tracheotomy and PEG tube placement are rarely necessary.
                                In all of the preceding craniotomies, the patient is turned 180º away from the anesthesiologist. This allows room for
                                the operating microscope, scrub assistant, and surgeon to all be placed around the head of the patient (Figs. 3-19
                                and 3-20). The patient’s head is turned to one side to allow exposure of the lateral cranium and neck. In the retro-
                                sigmoid craniotomy, a Mayfield is used for rigid skull fixation. As lateral table rotation is often used during these
                                cases, three straps should be used to secure the patient, and the contralateral arm should be well padded in order
                                to avoid ulnar neuropathy. Neurophysiologic monitoring (EMG, auditory brainstem reponses, and SSEPs) is used
                                throughout the case; therefore, muscle relaxants should be avoided.
                                Stimulation of the trigeminal or vagus nerves can cause bradycardia; therefore, the surgeon should be informed of any
                                unexpected physiologic changes occurring with the patient. Stable low blood pressure is useful in controlling slow
                                bleeding in the surgical field. Significant hemodynamic blood loss is rare and can usually be controlled with secure
                                packing. Large venous injuries may result in air embolism, and arterial injuries may require the assistance of interven-
                                tional neuroradiology. Having 1 U of cross-matched blood available is prudent in most craniotomies, whereas 2–4 U
                                may be required in glomus jugulare cases. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are controlled using an abdominal fat graft.
                                Usual Preop Diagnoses: Vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma); meningioma; paraganglioma (glomus jugu-
                                lare); lower cranial nerve schwannoma; epidermoid cyst; arachnoid cyst; cholesterol granuloma; chondrosarcoma;
                                chordoma

===== PAGE 253 =====
Neurotological Skull Base Surgery      253

                                                         VA
                                                                                                              XI

                                                                                                                                                            Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                              X

                                                                                                                                                              Otolaryngology—
                                                           V                                                  IX
                                                                                                              Ch
                                                                                                              Cb
                                                    VII, VIII

                                                                    F

                                Figure 3-18. Transjugular craniotomy illustrating the degree of intracranial exposure
                                obtained following resection of the sigmoid-jugular system and wide opening of the
                                posterior fossa dura. Note the multiple small rootlets of the lower cranial nerves
                                emanating from the lateral surface of the medulla. In contrast to extracranial procedures,
                                the sigmoid sinus is ligated proximally rather than packed extralumenally. While this
                                illustration depicts anterior rerouting of the facial nerve, this is not necessary in most
                                intracranial jugular foramen tumors. The sigmoid sinus has been controlled with a
                                suture ligature just distal to the transverse-sigmoid junction. (VA–vertebral artery,
                                F–flocculus, Ch–choroid, Cb–cerebellum, V–trigeminal nerve, VII–facial nerve,
                                VIII–audiovestibular nerve, IX–glossopharyngeal nerve, X–vagus nerve, XI–accessory
                                nerve). (Republished with permission from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology and Skull
                                Base Surgery. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine, turned 180° from anesthesia (Figs. 3-19 and 3-20). Three straps to secure patient and
                                             arms well padded. Mayfield rigid fixation in retrosigmoid craniotomies

                     Incision                Postauricular or temporal with possible extension into neck depending on approach

                     Special                 Microscope, neurophysiologic monitoring team, ultrasonic aspirator, neck dissection and vascu-
                       instrumentation       lar instruments (transjugular), middle fossa retractor (middle fossa), otologic drill

                     Antibiotics             Ceftriaxone 2 g iv or vancomycin 1 g iv for CSF penetration

                     Procedure time          4–12 h

                     Closing                 Minimize coughing and ↑ICP. Abdominal fat often harvested for CSF leak closure. Head dressing
                       considerations        may be placed.

                     EBL                     100–1000 mL depending on approach and tumor. One unit of cross-matched or autologous
                                             blood for craniotomies (2–4 U for glomus jugulare tumors) should be available.

                     Postop care             Extubation in majority of cases. Monitoring in ICU for the first night. Minimal sedatives to allow
                                             neurological monitoring. Airway and aspiration precautions in patients with possible lower cra-
                                             nial nerve palsies.

                     Mortality               Rare

===== PAGE 254 =====
254   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                            Figure 3-19. Operating room setup for posterior fossa craniotomy (translabyrinthine,
                                            retrosigmoid, and transjugular). (Republished with permission from Jackler RK: Atlas
                                            of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery. Mosby, St. Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K.
                                            Jackler © 2007.)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Morbidity              Hearing loss (approach dependent)
                                                        Vertigo
                                                        Facial nerve dysfunction
                                                        Hoarseness
                                                        Aspiration
                                                        CSF leak
                                                        Meningitis
                                                        Stroke (rare)

                                 Pain score             4–6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               5th to 6th decades for most pathology
                                                         Younger patients in tumors associated with neurofibromatosis (NF-2)

                                 Male:Female             1:1 for vestibular schwannoma

                                 Incidence               1/100,000

                                 Etiology                Neoplastic

                                 Associated              Hearing loss (use assistive devices when possible), vertigo, lower cranial nerve dysfunction
                                   conditions            (aspiration precautions), neurofibromatosis

===== PAGE 255 =====
Neurotological Skull Base Surgery       255

                                                                                                                                                      Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                        Otolaryngology—
                               Figure 3-20. Operating room setup for middle fossa craniotomy. (Republished with
                               permission from Jackler RK: Atlas of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery. Mosby, St.
                               Louis: 1996. Copyright Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS for neurotologic surgery
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Large vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas) can compress the brainstem, cause cranial nerve deficits, and
                   occasionally produce symptoms of ↑ ICP. If ↑ ICP is present, anesthetic management should follow the same general
                   principles as for other intracranial mass lesions (see p. 675).
                   Highly vascular tumors are usually embolized during preop neuroangiography. If the tumor’s blood supply is from
                   the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, these vessels cannot be safely embolized unless the patient has already
                   lost vision. ICA balloon occlusion test is performed during angiography if the ICA is involved or encased.
                   Large glomus tumors (GT) are capable of secreting catecholamines and occasionally serotonin, presenting with
                   symptoms of pheochromocytoma (e.g., hypertension, sweating, cardiovascular instability) or carcinoid syndrome.
                   Urine and plasma catecholamine levels should be routinely checked preop for all extensive GT, even if the patient
                   is asymptomatic. The same preop pharmacologic stabilization used for patients with a pheochromocytoma may
                   be required for these patients (see p. 675). Dehydration and/or electrolyte abnormalities must be corrected preop.
                   Intraop, the release of histamine and bradykinin can cause bronchospasm, tachycardia, and both hypotension and
                   hypertension. Large GTs can cause cranial nerve IX, X, XI, and XII palsies, which may predispose to airway compro-
                   mise, either by obstruction or aspiration (the risk of gastroparesis is increased in these patients).

===== PAGE 256 =====
256   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                The anterior skull base is a common location for many intradural and extradural cranial and/or facial pathologies.
                                The anterior cranial base surgery may involve combined transethmoid incision and bifrontal craniotomy approaches.
                                With that approach, the intraop surgical navigation set is frequently used, and a lumbar drain may be placed after
                                induction of anesthesia.

                                Respiratory                GT patients may be at ↑ risk for aspiration (cranial nerve impairment) or airway obstruc-
                                                           tion depending on tumor location.
                                                           GT may release histamine or bradykinin → bronchospasm
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                                           Tests: Imaging studies

                                Cardiovascular             ∼5% of GTs secrete catecholamines → cardiovascular instability
                                                           Tests: ECG, UA catecolamine metabolites

                                Neurological               Examine cranial nerves and document preop function. Check for Sx of ↑ ICP

                                Laboratory                 CBC; coags; other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication              In the absence of airway compromise standard premed (p. 675) is appropriate.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. The essential anesthesia considerations for neurotological surgery are largely similar
                                to otological surgical procedures (see p. 675). The anesthesiologist must be familiar with the principles of neuroanes-
                                thesia and understand both the pathological process involved and the planned surgical approach.
                                Standard premedication with short-acting benzodiazepine (e.g., iv midazolam) is warranted in the majority of cases,
                                but should be done with caution or avoided if symptoms of ↑ ICP are present. IV antibiotics with good CSF penetra-
                                tion (e.g., iv ceftriaxone 1–2 g) are uniformly used. Corticosteroids (e.g., iv dexamethasone 10–12 mg) may or may
                                not be given, depending on the size of the tumor and presence of brain edema.
                                The most critical aspect of the skull base surgery is identification and preservation of the cranial nerves. Intraopera-
                                tive neurophysiological monitoring (IOM) is used widely, especially when the tumors are located at the cervicome-
                                dullary junction, jugular foramen (JF), the upper clivus, when the tumors are large, and during revision surgeries.
                                Cranial nerves VII, IX, X, XI, and XII are most commonly monitored.
                                These surgeries can be extremely lengthy, and meticulous attention to proper patient positioning is paramount.

                                Induction                  Preop airway compromise is rare. Standard GETA is used in the majority of cases. Patients
                                                           with GT or other lesions extending into the JF, upper neck, or skull base may require
                                                           intraop identification and monitoring of the vagus nerve. In these patients, placement of
                                                           specialized ETT (e.g., Xomed ETT, Medtronic Xomed Inc., Jacksonville, FL) to monitor
                                                           EMG activity in the vocal cords may be requested by the surgeon.
                                                           The use of an intermediate-acting NMB (e.g., rocuronium) for tracheal intubation is
                                                           inconsequential with regard to IOM. In patients with ↑ ICP, standard induction precau-
                                                            tions should be observed. With large tumors, a lumbar drain will be placed after induction
                                                            to remove CSF to reduce surgical brain retraction.

                                Maintenance                The anesthetic technique should facilitate IOM. Intraop use of NMB is avoided.
                                                           Remifentanil-based techniques, allowing a safe reduction of the concentration of inha-
                                                            lational agent to ≤0.5 minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) are widely used. Admin-
                                                            istration of iv mannitol (0.5–1 g/kg), started after the scalp incision, and the use of mild
                                                            hyperventilation will facilitate brain relaxation for dural entry. Patients should be kept
                                                            euvolemic, and electrolyte status should be monitored during the surgery.
                                                            Stimulation of the trigeminal or vagus nerves during surgery can cause ↓↓ HR, ↓ BP or
                                                            ↑BP, arrhythmias, and even transient asystole, and the surgeon should be promptly in-
                                                            formed of their occurrence.

===== PAGE 257 =====
Neurotological Skull Base Surgery            257

                    Emergence                   A smooth extubation is important because coughing and bucking on the ETT may pro-
                                                voke postop bleeding, increase cerebral edema, and cause tension pneumocephalus (TP).
                                                Tracheal extubation is carried out in the majority of cases. The exceptions are the pa-
                                                tients who had undergone free flap reconstruction of the cranial base and possibly those
                                                where cranial nerve deficits existed preop. New paralysis of the lower cranial nerves with
                                                dysphasia remains the most serious complication of surgery, and delayed extubation and
                                                tracheotomy may be required in some patients.
                                                The patients are observed in ICU overnight.

                                                                                                                                                                   Head and Neck Surgery
                                                IV: large-bore access                       With the exception of GT, blood loss is usually

                                                                                                                                                                     Otolaryngology—
                    Blood and fluid
                       requirements             NS/LR @ 3–4 mL/kg/h                         gradual and rarely requires transfusion.

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors for induction             A-line is placed after induction of anesthesia. CVP
                                                (p. 676).                                   should be guided by the patient’s medical history;
                                                Arterial line                               consider if significant blood loss is anticipated.
                                                ± CVP
                                                Foley catheter                              A Foley catheter is used routinely.

                    Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                3 eyes

                    Complications               Massive blood loss                          Glomus tumors are highly vascular.
                                                Cranial nerve injury                        Airway compromise may preclude extubation.
                                                VAE                                         Monitor for VAE (e.g., ETCO2).
                                                Aspiration

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Trigeminal and vagal reflexes               IV atropine.
                                                Cranial nerve injury                        Extubation considerations (cranial nerve deficits)
                                                Tension pneumocephalus

                    Pain                        MSO4/Dilaudid                               The use of a PCA may be appropriate in older chil-
                      management                                                            dren and adults.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Abuzayed B, Canbaz B, Sanus GZ, et al: Combined craniofacial resection of anterior skull base tumors: long-term results and
                        experience of single institution. Neurosurg Rev 2011; 34:101–13.
                     2. Gil Z, Cohen JT, Spektor S, et al: Anterior skull base surgery without prophylactic airway diversion procedures. Otolaryngol
                        Head Neck Surg 2003; 128:681–5.
                     3. Heman-Ackah, SE, Golfinos, JG, Roland, JT Jr: Management of surgical complications and failures in accoustic neuroma
                        surgery. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2012; 45(2):455–70.
                     4. Jackler RK, Sim DW: Retrosigmoid approach to tumors of the cerebellopontine angle. In: Brackmann DE, Shelton C, Arriaga
                        MA, eds. Otologic Surgery. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia: 1994, 619–36.
                     5. Jackson LE, Roberson JB Jr: Vagal nerve monitoring in surgery of the skull base: a comparison of efficacy of three techniques.
                        Am J Otol 1999; 20:649–56.
                     6. Jellish WS, Murdoch J, Leonetti JP: Perioperative management of complex skull base surgery: the anesthesiologist’s point of
                        view. Neurosurg Focus 2002; 12(5):e5.
                     7. Jensen NF: Glomus tumors of the head and neck: anesthetic considerations. Anesth Analg 1994; 78:112–9.
                     8. Kaplan MJ, Fischbein NJ, Harsh GR: Anterior skull base surgery. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2005; 38:107–31.
                     9. Lopez JR: The use of evoked potentials in intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2004;
                        15:63–84.
                    10. Schaller B, Cornelius JF, Prabhakar H, et al: Trigemino-Cardiac Reflex Examination Group (TCREG): The trigemino-cardiac
                        reflex: an update of the current knowledge. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2009; 21:187–95.
                    11. Smith MF, Roberson JB: Avoidance and management of complications. In: Brackmann DE, Shelton C, Arriaga MA, eds.
                        Otologic Surgery. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia: 1994, 359–71.
                    12. Topsakal C, Al-Mefty O, Bulsara KR, et al: Intraoperative monitoring of lower cranial nerves in skull base surgery: technical
                        report and review of 123 monitored cases. Neurosurg Rev 2008; 31:45–53.

===== PAGE 258 =====
258   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY FOR
                                SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Robert W. Riley, Nelson B. Powell, Donald M. Sesso, and Jerome E. Hester
                                Description: The surgical approaches to the upper airway attempt to relieve obstruction occurring most com-
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                monly at the level of the palate, base of tongue, or pharynx. These fall into three categories: (a) classic procedures
    Otolaryngology—

                                that directly enlarge the upper airway; (b) specialized procedures that directly enlarge the upper airway; and
                                (c) tracheotomy to bypass the pharyngeal portion of the upper airway. The surgeon performs a preop evaluation,
                                including complete head and neck exam, fiberoptic examination of the upper airway, and cephalometric radiographs.
                                This, together with the results of the polysomnogram, will enable the surgeon to determine what levels of the airway
                                need to be surgically modified. Individuals with severe obstruction may require a multistage approach to treatment.
                                Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) (Fig. 3-21) is a procedure that removes a rim of the soft palate, including
                                the uvula. This shortens and tightens this tissue, thus preventing collapse during sleep. The tonsils, if present, are

                                          Figure 3-21. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP): (A&B) tonsils and redundant soft
                                          palate are excised; (C) mucosal flaps are prepared for closure; (D) the soft palate is
                                          closed to itself, and the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars are sutured to each other.

===== PAGE 259 =====
Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered Breathing          259

                                                                                                                                                       Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                         Otolaryngology—
                               Figure 3-22. Uvulopalatal flap (UPF): (A) uvula is reflected back to the hard palate to
                               identify the muscular crease; (B) mucosa on the oral side of the uvula and soft palate
                               are removed, and part of the uvula is amputated; (C) mucosal incisions are closed with
                               absorbable suture.

                   removed. The muscular crease of the palate is used as a landmark to prevent overly aggressive resection, which could
                   → velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI), an uncommon but serious complication. The wound is then closed, using
                   interrupted absorbable sutures.
                   Uvulopalatal flap (UPF) (Fig. 3-22) is a variation of UPPP, used for treating palatal obstruction. Rather than excising
                   a rim of the soft palate, the mucosa of the anterior aspect of the uvula is removed, along with a corresponding area of
                   the soft palate. The uvula is then reflected superiorly and sutured into place with absorbable suture. This procedure
                   may be done in combination with a tonsillectomy. UPF is theoretically reversible if signs of VPI become evident. UPF
                   also may be somewhat less painful than UPPP.
                   Uvulopalatopharyngoglossoplasty (UPPGP) is a rarely performed, intraoral procedure incorporating a modified
                   UPPP with limited resection of the base of tongue for both retropalatal and retrolingual collapse.
                   Laser midline glossectomy (LMG) is used to enlarge the retrolingual airway by excision of ~2.5 cm × 5 cm of midline
                   tongue tissue through an intraoral approach. This also may require lingual tonsillectomy, reduction of the aryepiglot-
                   tic folds, and partial epiglottectomy (Fig. 3-23). LMG usually is combined with a tracheotomy for airway protection.

===== PAGE 260 =====
260   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                          Figure 3-23. LMG/lingualplasty technique: A: Excision of a midline segment of the
                                          base of the tongue is performed with a laser or electrocautery; this excision occasionally
                                          is carried lateral. B: The remaining tongue muscle edges are reapproximated with
                                          absorbable suture. C: Lateral view of tongue.

                                Lingualplasty (LP) is the same procedure as LMG, except that additional tongue tissue is extirpated posteriorly
                                and laterally to that portion removed by LMG (Fig. 3-23). It is usually combined with a tracheotomy (see below) for
                                airway protection.
                                Inferior sagittal mandibular osteotomy and genioglossal advancement (MOGA) (Fig. 3-24) is an intraoral ap-
                                proach designed to enlarge the retrolingual area. This procedure relies on the firm attachment of the genioglossus
                                muscle to the geniotubercle, a bony protuberance on the medial (lingual) aspect of the mandible. A mucosal incision
                                is made intraorally, and soft tissue, including the mentalis muscle, is elevated off the mandible. Osteotomies, which
                                include the geniotubercle on the inner cortex, are then performed. The segment is advanced and rotated to lock it in
                                place. The outer cortex is removed, and the fragment is fixated to the inferior mandible with a titanium screw. The
                                advancement is limited by the width of the mandible and laxity in the genioglossus muscle.
                                Hyoid myotomy and suspension (HM) is a retrolingual procedure that alleviates obstruction by redundant lateral
                                pharyngeal tissue or a retrodisplaced epiglottis. A horizontal cervical incision above the hyoid bone is performed,
                                and the dissection is carried down to the suprahyoid musculature. The midline hyoid bone is isolated and then ad-
                                vanced over the thyroid ala. It is then immobilized with two medial and two lateral permanent sutures (Fig. 3-25).
                                The wound is closed, a drain placed, and a pressure dressing applied.

                                Maxillomandibular osteotomy and advancement (MMO) prevents retropalatal collapse through stenting
                                of the superior pharyngeal muscles and widening of the nasopharyngeal inlet. It also minimizes retrolingual
                                obstruction by placing the genioglossus muscle under tension, providing more room in the oral cavity for soft

===== PAGE 261 =====
Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered Breathing   261

                                                                                                                                        Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                          Otolaryngology—
                               Figure 3-24. The mandibular osteotomy and genioglossus advancement (MOGA)
                               technique: A: Lateral view. B: Anterior view. A rectangular anterior mandibular
                               osteotomy below the incisor teeth is advanced, rotated, and immobilized.

                               Figure 3-25. The hyoid myotomy (HM) and suspension technique: the hyoid is
                               advanced over the thyroid lamina and immobilized.

===== PAGE 262 =====
262   s e c t i o n 3.0   Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                            Figure 3-26. Maxillomandibular osteotomy (MMO) and advancement surgery
                                            technique.

                                tissues, and stenting the lateral pharyngeal wall. An outer-table cranial bone graft usually is performed, along
                                with arch-bar placement (or orthodontic banding in an outpatient setting) prior to the osteotomies. A LeFort
                                I maxillary osteotomy and bilateral sagittal-split mandibular osteotomy are performed. The skeletal arches are
                                advanced forward ~10 mm and secured with the aid of a methylmethacrylate dental splint (Fig. 3-26). Immobi-
                                lization with wires, plates, and screws follows, then wound closure, intermaxillary fixation, and pressure dress-
                                ing application. This procedure usually is performed if previous upper airway procedures have not completely
                                relieved the sleep-related obstruction.

                                Tracheotomy is a procedure performed to bypass pharyngeal obstruction. It is usually reserved for those individuals
                                with severe OSA and may be used to secure the airway before other procedures. Preop evaluation, including
                                fiberoptic examination, will help identify those individuals whose airways are so compromised that the tracheotomy
                                 should be done with the patient awake and under local infiltration anesthetic. A horizontal cervical incision is per-
                                 formed midway between the manubrium and the cricoid cartilage. Dissection is carried out in the midline down to
                                 the trachea, frequently transecting the thyroid gland; then, an opening in the superior trachea allows placement of a
                                 tracheotomy tube (see p. 190).

                                Radiofrequency (RF) probes use heat to cause reduction and tightening of tissue. This may be used to enable the
                                airway at the level of the nose (by reduction of the turbinates), the palate, or the base of tongue. Whereas the nasal
                                and palatal procedures are usually performed as outpatient under local anesthesia, the initial treatment of the base
                                of tongue commonly is performed in the OR, either alone or in conjunction with other airway procedures. The area
                                of the tongue just anterior to the circumvallate papillae is infiltrated with local anesthetic. A needle-like RF probe
                                is then used to heat the tissue. There is usually little or no immediate edema, although the surgeon may admit the
                                patient overnight for airway observation.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Sleep-disordered breathing, including upper airway resistance syndrome and obstructive
                                sleep apnea (OSA) syndrome

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                Intraoral (except HM–horizontal cervical above hyoid bone)

===== PAGE 263 =====
Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered Breathing       263

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                For osteotomy cases (MOGA, MMO), sagittal and reciprocating saws, drills
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 When using a CO2 laser (LMG, LP), a laser-safe ETT or, more commonly, a tracheotomy tube is
                       considerations       required. MMO requires a nasal intubation. Tracheotomy may be performed with patient sitting
                                            with iv sedation and/or local infiltration. Dexamethasone 8 mg iv.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv

                                                                                                                                                     Head and Neck Surgery
                                                                                                                                                       Otolaryngology—
                     Surgical time          UPPP, UPF: 20–60 min
                                            UPPGP, LMG, LP: 1–3 h
                                            MOGA, HM: 30–60 min
                                            MMO: 3–5 h

                     EBL                    UPPP, UPF, MOGA, HM: 0–100 mL
                                            UPPGP, LMG, LP: 50–250 mL
                                            MMO: 100–500 mL

                     Postop care            UPPP, UPF: PACU → ward
                                            Multiple procedures, MMO, labile HTN: ICU → ward

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Paresthesias: 10%
                                            HTN: 5%
                                            Wound dehiscence: 5%
                                            Bleeding: 1–2%
                                            Infection: 1–2%
                                            Hematoma/seroma: 1–2%
                                            Upper airway obstruction: 1%

                     Pain score             UPPP, UPPGP, LMG, LP: 8–10
                                            UPF, MOGA, HM, MMO: 6–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Children, adolescents, adults

                     Male:Female            3–10:1

                     Incidence              4–10% of adult males; 2–4% of adult females

                     Etiology               Upper airway collapse by frank obstruction or muscular relaxation

                     Associated             Systemic and pulmonary HTN; CAD; cardiac arrhythmias; GERD; depression; obesity;
                       conditions           polycythemia

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   Vladimir Nekhendzy, Brett L. Miller, and Michael W. Champeau
                        PREOPERATIVE
                   Sleep-disordered breathing is extremely common, affecting nearly 20% of adult population, with 7–8% suffering
                   from moderate-to-severe OSA. It is estimated that over 20% of adult surgical population suffer from OSA, where
                   it remains undiagnosed in the majority (70%) of patients. OSA is characterized by periods of intermittent upper
                   airway occlusion during sleep, leading to repeated episodes of hypoxemia/hypercapnia, sympathetic a ctivation, and
                   sleep fragmentation. OSA adversely affects a variety of organ systems, with widespread implications for the surgical
                   patient. The presence and severity of OSA is strongly correlated with obesity (see p. 514) and m
                                                                                                                   etabolic syndrome,
                   systemic and pulmonary HTN, CHF, arrhythmias, heart attacks, and stroke. The mainstay of treatment is continu-
                   ous positive airway pressure (CPAP), which acts to stent open collapsible airways, and the CPAP treatment must be
                   continued in the perioperative setting, especially in patients with severe OSA.

===== PAGE 264 =====
264   s e c t i o n 3.0       Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Table 3-4. The STOP-BANG Questionnaire for Screening for the Risk of Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
                                Snore loudly?                                                  BMI > 35 kg/m2?
                                Tired during the day?                                          Age > 50 yr?
                                Observed cessation of breathing during sleep?                  Neck circumference > 40 cm?
                                Pressure (high blood pressure)?                                Gender male?
                                Answering “Yes” to 3 or more questions confers a high risk of OSA. The higher the cumulative risk score, the greater the possibility of severe OSA.
  Head and Neck Surgery
    Otolaryngology—

                                When screening for the presence of OSA during preop office visit, a physician may wish to use the highly sensitive
                                and validated STOP-BANG questionnaire (Table 3-4). The patients with either known or presumed OSA should
                                undergo outpatient surgery only if their comorbidities are optimized, if postop pain is going to be mild and can be
                                predominantly managed with nonopioid analgesics, and if (for CPAP users) the patients can continue to use CPAP
                                postop. For practical purposes, patients with severe OSA (ASA physical status III) should not routinely undergo
                                office-based surgery under GA or sedation. Postop, the ASA recommends extended monitoring of outpatients with
                                OSA for an additional 3 h.
                                Other ENT pathology (e.g., septal deviation, laryngo/tracheomalacia, tonsil and adenoid hypertrophy) may be pres-
                                ent in OSA patients. Intraop, the OSA patients demonstrate enhanced sensitivity to opioids and benzodiazepines,
                                which may lead to rapidly developing respiratory depression, upper airway collapse and airway obstruction. Con-
                                scious sedation of these patients should be performed with extreme caution. A multimodal approach that minimizes
                                narcotic medications (e.g., NSAIDs, acetaminophen, cyclooxygenase-2 specific inhibitors) should be used periopera-
                                tively whenever feasible.

                                Respiratory                      OSA patients may present with difficult airway problems, related to both mask ventilation and
                                                                 tracheal intubation. The awake vs asleep approach to tracheal intubation should be guided by
                                                                 careful airway evaluation with special attention to the presence of the predictors of difficult
                                                                 mask ventilation (DMV) and their association with difficult intubation (see Introduction,
                                                                 Anesthesiologist’s Perspective, above). Awake intubation is rarely required, but should be
                                                                 considered if the predictors of DMV coincide with factors predicting difficult intubation.
                                                                 Mask ventilation problems encountered in OSA patients are most commonly due to the
                                                                 pharyngeal airway obstructing at the level of soft palate and base of the tongue. This obstruc-
                                                                 tion can usually be managed with supraglottic airway, which can also serve as a c onduit for
                                                                 a subsequent tracheal intubation, either blind (e.g., intubating LMA) or fiberoptic-guided.
                                                                 Discussion with the surgeon of the results of preop nasopharyngoscopy is useful. COPD/
                                                                 asthma often coexist and have a synergistic effect on worsening OSA. In advanced cases,
                                                                 chronic OSA → hypoxia/hypercarbia → pulmonary HTN → right heart failure.
                                                                 Tests: CXR, ABG and PFT as indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular                   Patients are at ↑ risk for systemic and pulmonary HTN (Sx: loud P2, clubbing, ↑ JVD, cya-
                                                                 nosis, RVH, right-axis deviation), CHF, cardiac arrhythmias (nonsustained VT, 2nd degree
                                                                 block, sinus arrest), MI, and stroke. Patients may have dyspnea on exertion and at rest,
                                                                 making routine assessment of cardiovascular function and reserve difficult.
                                                                 Tests: ECG; stress ECHO if abnormal ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                                Neurologic                       A polysomnogram is typically performed preop, reporting the number of apneas (cessation
                                                                 or near cessation of airflow for 10 sec) and hypopneas (30% reduction in airflow over 10
                                                                 seconds with 3% hemoglobin desaturation). The apnea hypopnea index (AHI) is the num-
                                                                 ber of apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep. AHI of <5 is normal, 5–15 indicates mild
                                                                 OSA, 15–30 indicates moderate OSA, and >30 indicates severe OSA. OSA
                                                                 patients exhibit various degrees of daytime somnolence and may be chronically fatigued
                                                                 and irritable due to sleep fragmentation. Daytime sleepiness also may be associated with
                                                                 hypothyroidism or anemia, which should be ruled out. The impaired sleep/arousal cycle
                                                                 leads to autonomic hyperactivity; peripheral neuropathy and gastroparesis due to obesity
                                                                 may occur. An exaggerated response to sedative medications is frequently observed.
                                                                 Tests: As indicated by H&P

===== PAGE 265 =====
Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered Breathing         265

                    Hematologic         Chronic hypoxia → polycythemia (Sx: clubbing, cyanosis) →↑ risk of CVA. Hypercoagu-
                                        lability may be present due to chronic oxidative stress that leads to associated systemic
                                        inflammation and endothelial dysfunction.
                                        Test: Hct, coags as required

                    Gastrointestinal    This patient population has a higher incidence of GERD and hiatal hernia; thus, full-
                      and Renal         stomach precautions (see p. B-5) may be required. Renal function may be impaired, likely
                                        due to chronic sympathetic activation.

                                                                                                                                                Head and Neck Surgery
                    Laboratory          Tests: As indicated from H&P. Impaired glucose control is often present. Elevated plasma

                                                                                                                                                  Otolaryngology—
                                        bicarb levels point to coexisting obstructive respiratory disease (asthma, COPD) and/or
                                        CO2 retention.

                    Premedication       Typically, sedative medications should be kept to a minimum or avoided in this patient
                                        population. If sedative premedication is given, the anesthesiologist must remain with the
                                        patient and be prepared to manage the airway. Occasionally, OSA patients may have been
                                        prescribed stimulants (i.e., amphetamine) to combat daytime somnolence. These patients
                                        may not respond to indirect sympathomimetics (i.e., ephedrine) used to treat postinduction
                                        hypotension.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA.

                    Induction           Asleep airway management is safe in the majority of OSA patients (see Preoperative Respi-
                                        ratory considerations, above). Supraglottic airways with gastric access (e.g., LMA-Proseal/
                                        SupremeTM) should be readily available for rescue ventilation (see above). Topical anes-
                                        thesia of the upper airway may impair airway reflexes and airway muscle tone, therefore
                                        provoking airway collapse and possibly worsening OSA postop.
                                        Orotracheal intubation is preferred, except in patients undergoing base of the tongue sur-
                                        gery (e.g., lingular tonsillectomy) or MMO, where nasotracheal intubation is required. Pre-
                                        oxygenation with CPAP in 25˚ head-up position for 3–5 minutes will prolong safe apnea
                                        time. OSA patients with severe GERD should receive aspiration prophylaxis, and RSI
                                        should be performed, when indicated.
                                        Standard induction with propofol and an opioid (e.g., fentanyl) is safe, followed by admin-
                                        istration of an intermediate-acting neuromuscular blocker (e.g., Rocuronium) for tracheal
                                        intubation.

                    Maintenance          Maintenance using TIVA with propofol (80–180 mcg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.05–
                                         0.3 mcg/kg/min), supplemented with iv boluses of fentanyl (usually not exceeding 2–4
                                         mcg/kg total dose), with or without N2O, is useful for OSA surgery. It facilitates main-
                                         tenance of moderate-controlled hypotension and improves hemodynamic stability dur-
                                         ing even most stimulating parts of surgery. Propofol administration causes profound
                                         depression of airway reflexes, thereby facilitating smooth emergence from anesthesia. A
                                         “sandwich anesthetic” technique utilizing a combination of TIVA and a low-dose inha-
                                         lational agent (e.g., sevoflurane 0.4–0.6%) can also be used to achieve the above-stated
                                         objectives.
                                         Hypertensive responses should be treated aggressively, especially during craniofacial
                                        advancement with down-fracture of the pterygoid plate in MMO. Maintaining low SBP
                                         (below 100 mmHg) and low MAP (60–70 mmHg) is critical during this part of the proce-
                                         dure. Administration of “ad lib” iv boluses of remifentanil 1–3 mcg/kg, supplemented with
                                         iv labetalol (5–10 mg increments) and hydralazine (5 mg increments) is usually effective.
                                         Esmolol and SNP infusions can be considered, but are usually not necessary. Administra-
                                         tion of a dexmedetomidine infusion should be considered. A typical loading dose is 0.5–
                                         1.0 mcg/kg iv bolus over 10 min, followed by a continuous infusion of 0.2–1.0 mcg/kg/hr.
                                         Dexamethasone 0.1–0.15 mg/kg is recommended to decrease postop airway edema.

===== PAGE 266 =====
266   s e c t i o n 3.0    Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery

                                Emergence                    The patient must remain intubated until suﬃciently awake to respond to verbal commands.
                                                             Neuromuscular blockade should be fully reversed, and the return of protective airway
                                                             reflexes (e.g., swallowing) should be observed. The patient’s stomach should be suctioned
                                                             to remove swallowed blood. Premature extubation can cause complete loss of airway (2°
                                                             glossopalatal obstruction) or laryngospasm. With extensive pharyngeal and base of the
                                                             tongue work significant upper airway edema must be anticipated, and extubation over a
                                                             tube changer may be appropriate in selected cases. An insertion of a nasopharyngeal air-
                                                             way before emergence can be recommended in patients who had extensive surgery or had
  Head and Neck Surgery

                                                             severe OSA preop. Anticipate pain and ↑ BP during emergence, which will continue into
    Otolaryngology—

                                                             ﬁrst postop day. Narcotic analgesics (e.g., morphine 0.1–0.15 mg/kg) should be admin-
                                                             istered before emergence. Antihypertensive agents usually required to prevent rebound
                                                             hypertension and associated postop bleeding, particularly from osteotomy sites.

                                Blood and fluid              IV: 16–18 ga × 1               Minimal-to-little blood loss with all except MMO. EBL with
                                   requirements              NS/LR @ 2–3 mL/kg/h            MMO is 100–500 mL. Attempt to minimize fluids to reduce
                                                                                            severity of postop airway edema (< 1000 mL of NS/LR for all
                                                                                            except MMO; < 2000 mL for MMO).

                                Monitoring                   Standard monitors              Arterial line also suggested for postop BP control in all patients
                                                             (p. B-1)                       with preexisting HTN and in any patient who displays labile
                                                             Arterial line (MMO             BP intraop. Control of BP in the postop period is an extremely
                                                             and ICU admits)                high priority.

                                Positioning                  3 and pad pressure             Occasional requests for minimal Trendelenburg or semi-sitting
                                                             points                         positioning.
                                                             3 eyes

                                Complications                ETT damage                       Airway problems and respiratory depression are the most
                                                             Airway                         c ommon complications (hypercapnia, pulmonary edema, rein-
                                                             Hemorrhage                       tubation, bronchospasm, and laryngospasm). In addition, OSA
                                                             Dysrhythmias                    patients are at increased risk for CHF, MI, arrhythmia, CVA, and
                                                                                              delirium. ETT may become dislodged or kinked during surgical
                                                                                              manipulations.
                                                                                              Vagally mediated severe bradycardia/asystole may occur with
                                                                                              maxillary or mandibular advancement during MMO.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications                Airway compromise              Airway compromise 2° hematoma, edema, excessive sedation,
                                                             Airway obstruction             or underlying disease. Consider observation in ICU for patients
                                                                                            having multiple procedures, MMO, or labile HTN.
                                                             HTN                            Postop HTN is extremely common and can contribute signifi-
                                                             Aspiration                     cantly to likelihood of postop airway obstruction 2° hematoma.
                                                             Infections                     The risk of wound infection is increased postop in OSA patients.

                                Pain                         Minimize iv narcotics.          Avoid excessive postop sedation. UPPP patients, in particular,
                                  management                                                 should be warned preop of anticipated significant postop
                                                                                            discomfort. CPAP should be continued throughout the entire
                                                                                             postop period. Consider BiPAP if noncompliant with CPAP.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Adesanya AO, Lee W, Greilich NB, et al: Perioperative management of obstructive sleep apnea. Chest 2010; 138:1489–98.
                                  2. Chung F, Elsaid H: Screening for obstructive sleep apnea before surgery: why is it important? Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;
                                     22:405–11.
                                  3. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et al: STOP questionnaire: a tool to screen patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology
                                     2008; 108:812–21.

===== PAGE 267 =====
Reconstructive Surgery for Sleep-Disordered Breathing                267

                     4. Chung SA, Yuan H, Chung F: A systemic review of obstructive sleep apnea and its implications for anesthesiologists. Anesth
                        Analg 2008; 107:1543–63.
                     5. Drummond GB: Comparison of sedation with midazolam and ketamine: effects on airway muscle activity. Br J Anaesth 1996;
                        76:663–7.
                     6. Finkel KJ, Searleman AC, Tymkew H, et al: Prevalence of undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea among adult surgical patients
                        in an academic medical center. Sleep Med 2009; 10:753–8.
                     7. Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof JL, et al: Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive
                        sleep apnea: a report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with
                        obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2006; 104:1081–93.
                     8. Hillman DR, Platt PR, Eastwood PR: Anesthesia, sleep, and upper airway collapsibility. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28:443–55.

                                                                                                                                                                  Head and Neck Surgery
                     9. Isono S. Obstructive sleep apnea of obese adults: pathophysiology and perioperative airway management. Anesthesiology

                                                                                                                                                                    Otolaryngology—
                        2009; 110:908–21.
                    10. Joshi GP, Ankichetty SP, Gan TJ, et al: Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia consensus statement on preoperative selection of
                        adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea scheduled for ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 2012; 115:1060–8.
                    11. Kheterpal S, Han R, Tremper KK, et al: Incidence and predictors of difficult and impossible mask ventilation. Anesthesiology
                        2006; 105:885–91.
                    12. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, et al: Prediction and outcomes of impossible mask ventilation: a review of 50,000
                        anesthetics. Anesthesiology 2009; 110:891–7.
                    13. Langeron O, Masso E, Huraux C, et al: Prediction of difficult mask ventilation. Anesthesiology 2000; 92:1229–36.
                    14. Lopez PP, Stefan B, Schulman CI, Byers PM: Prevalence of sleep apnea in morbidly obese patients who presented for weight
                        loss surgery evaluation: more evidence for routine screening for obstructive sleep apnea before weight loss surgery. Am Surg
                        2008; 74:834–8.
                    15. Somers VK, White DP, Amin R, et al: Sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease: an American Heart Association/American
                        College Of Cardiology Foundation Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association Council for High Blood
                        Pressure Research Professional Education Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Stroke Council, and Council On
                        Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation 2008; 118:1080–111.
                    16. Woodson BT, Franco R: Physiology of sleep disordered breathing. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2007; 40:691–711.

                   Suggested Viewing
                   Links are available online to the following videos:
                   Segmental Anatomy (www.bronchoscopy.nl): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ThYHLG50pH0
                   Principles of Laryngoscopy (Fibreoptic): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MKKdu2bFDw
                   TMJ Anatomy “The Yoint” Video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nH8KG3fIoBM
                   Clinical Complications of Tracheostomy: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UCYBGRj4Teo
                   Transoral Robotic Surgery: Supraglottic Laryngectomy – Johns Hopkins Hospital:
                   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6q9q4umrBAI
                   Endoscopic Septoplasty: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpSVrVL77kc&list=PL3FE459DF3EEEA621
                   Tonsillectomy: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RTFUpoqhbHo
                   Thyroidectomy: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZUhpivAkeHI
                   Modified Radical Neck Dissection: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALcizhZln58
                   Modified Radical Neck Dissection, part 1: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2uilaptogdU
                   Modified Radical Neck Dissection, part 2: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pp6oqT2Pvr4
                   Modified Radical Neck Dissection, part 3: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HkdiXwN_yR8
                   Endoscopic View of Zenker Diverticulum Repair: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P79SsJxO2SA
                   Endoscopic Sinus Surgery: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0PeRHPn-lo

