# 5_THORACIC_SURGERY
# Source: 5 THORACIC SURGERY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 5.0 Thoracic Surgery
# Pages: 278-344
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy (p. 281)
- Wedge Resection Of Lung Lesion (p. 290)
- Chest-Wall Resection (p. 293)
- Repair Of Pectus Excavatum Or Carinatum (p. 295)
- Thoracoplasty (p. 299)
- Drainage Of Empyema (p. 300)
- Tracheal Resection (p. 304)
- Excision Of Mediastinal Tumor (p. 308)
- Mediastinoscopy (p. 309)
- Bronchoscopy—Flexible And Rigid (p. 320)
- Video-Assisted Thoracoscopy Surgery (Vats) (p. 326)
- Thymectomy (p. 329)
- Excision Of Blebs Or Bullae (p. 333)
- Lung-Volume Reduction Surgery (p. 336)
- Bronchopulmonary Lavage (p. 340)
- Lung Transplant (p. 344)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                      5.0 Thoracic
                                      Surgery

                                      surgeons
                                      Robert E. Merritt, MD
                                      Walter B. Cannon, MD

                                      anesthesiologists
                                      Vivek Kulkarni, MD
                                      Jay B. Brodsky, MD

===== PAGE 278 =====
INTRODUCTION—SURGEON’S PERSPECTIVE
                                 AIRWAY AND LUNG ACCESS CONFLICTS
                                 As in Chapter 3, induction and maintenance of anesthesia for thoracic surgery requires interdisciplinary cooperation.
                                 Perioperative communication between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is required for a satisfactory outcome. For
                                 example, during periods of OLV, significant hypoxia and hypotension may occur. Surgery may need to be stopped tem-
                                  porarily while the hypoxia is corrected by reinflation of the unventilated lung. Hypotension in the absence of bleeding
                                  can be corrected by less vigorous retraction of the lung and heart by the surgeon. Quick and timely communication
                                  between the anesthesiologist and the surgeon can be lifesaving. Occasionally, during critical parts of the dissection, ces-
                                  sation of all respiration for short periods of time can make the surgeon’s job much easier. Testing the changes is an option.

                                 TUBES AND TUBE SIZES
                                 Although the size of the ETTs may not be particularly critical for most types of surgery, thoracic surgical procedures
                                 are often different. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) through the ETT is a common event. The standard FOB just fits
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 through an 8.0 ETT. The fiberoptic laryngoscope (FOL) used for difficult intubations will fit smaller ETTs and DLTs.
                                 Proper lubrication of the bronchoscope with a polyethylene glycol-based ointment (e.g., Carbowax rather than an
                                 aqueous jelly, which will dry out quickly) makes manipulation quite easy. The FOL can be used for correct position-
                                 ing of the DLT. If the bronchial portion of the DLT cannot be advanced into the left main bronchus, the broncho-
                                 scope can be advanced through the bronchial side of the DLT into the left main bronchus. Then, through use of the
                                 bronchoscope as a stent, the DLT can be advanced over the bronchoscope into the left bronchus. The depth of
                                 the tube can be determined by bronchoscopic observation of the right main bronchus through the tracheal side of
                                 the DLT. If a laser is to be involved, have a laser-compatible ETT available, keep FiO2 to < 0.3 and do not use N2O.

                                 PATIENT POSITIONING AND SURGICAL INCISIONS
                                 Patient positioning for these procedures is dictated by the type of incision used. The incisions used most often
                                 by thoracic surgeons are the posterolateral thoracotomy (and its variations; Fig. 5-1A), the median sternotomy
                                 (Fig. 5-1B), and the anterior thoracotomy (often bilateral; Fig. 5-1C). For procedures where excellent exposure of
                                 both lungs is mandatory (e.g., bipulmonary lung transplantation), the “clamshell” incision (Fig. 5-2) has become
                                 popular. Generally, patients are in the supine position for anterior incisions (sternotomy, cervical, and anterior
                                 thoracotomy) and in the lateral position for lateral and posterolateral thoracotomies. Thoracoscopic procedures
                                 (VATS) typically are performed in the lateral position. (Note: A review of a recent CXR in the OR will help ensure
                                 that the thoracotomy is performed on the correct side.)

                                           Figure 5-1. Primary incisions for thoracic surgery. A: Posterolateral thoracotomy, in
                                           lateral position. The incision curves in an S shape, passing under the tip of the scapula
                                           over in the fifth interspace anteriorly. B: Median sternotomy, in supine position, arms
                                           at side: the incision is made from the suprasternal notch to a point between the xiphoid
                                           process and umbilicus. C: Anterior thoracotomy in supine position. (Reproduced with
                                           permission from Fry WA: Thoracic incisions. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds.
                                           General Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

                           278

===== PAGE 279 =====
Introduction—Surgeon’s Perspective         279

                                                                                                                                                  Thoracic Surgery
                               Figure 5-2. The “clamshell” incision, in classic supine position, affords excellent
                               exposure, especially for bilateral lung procedures. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Fry WA: Thoracic incisions. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General
                               Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

                   Patients undergoing surgery in the lateral position are initially placed on a bean bag. When GA is induced,
                   the patient is rolled onto his/her side with the kidney rest being positioned at the level of the lower ribs. An
                   axillary roll is placed to prevent axillary compression, and the table is flexed to assist in spreading the ribs. The
                   head and neck must be aligned in a neutral position to avoid brachial plexus injuries. The lower arm can be
                   either extended on an arm board or flexed and placed next to the patient’s head (Fig. 5-3A). The upper arm is

                               Figure 5-3. Lateral positioning for thoracic lateral and posterolateral procedures.
                               A: Patient on his side, with kidney rest, axillary roll, pillows between knees, and padding
                               under elbows. Wide adhesive tape secures the position. B: Upper arm abducted 90% on
                               arm board. (Reproduced with permission from Fry WA: Thoracic incisions. In: Shields
                               TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott
                               Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

===== PAGE 280 =====
280   s e c t i o n 5.0                       Thoracic Surgery

                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                        SIO
                                                                                                                                                                                      VI
                                                                                                                                                                                    DI
                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                     SU                                                          R         IO
                                                                                                                                                              PE                         APICAL-
                                                                                                                                                            SU                          POSTERIOR

                                                                                                        PE
                                                                                       APICAL

                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                            OR
                                                                           POSTERIOR

                                                                                                                    LO

                                                                                                                                      ERIOR LOBE
                                                                                                                      BE
                                                                                                                                                                         ANTERIOR

                                                              SUPERIOR                         ANTERIOR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                SUP.
                                              INFERIOR LOBE

                                                                                                                                   SUP
                                                                                         LAT
                                                                                            ER
                                                                                                AL

                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                         SUPERIOR

                                                                                                                                                                                           L ED
                                                                                                                                                   A R)

                                                                                                                                                                                         SA M
                                                                           ANTERIOR

                                                                                                                                                        DIVISI O N
                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                       BA IOR
                                                                                                                                                       (LINGUL
                                                              LAT. BAS

                                                                            BASAL

                                                                                                              AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LAT.

                                                                                                              I

                                                                                                                                                                                        ER
                                                                                                           ED

                                                                                                                              BE
                                                                                                                                                                         INR                                 BAS.

                                                                                                          M

                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                    AN
                                                                                                                          LO

                                                                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                                      DL

                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                             INFER
                                                                                                              MID                                                                    I N FE R I O R L O B E
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                                           Lateral view                                                                                               Lateral view

                                                                                       RIGHT                                                                                               LEFT
                                                                                                                                                                           PERIO R
                                                                                                                                                                         SU        D
                                                                                                                                                                                           VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                S IO

                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N SUPE
                                                                                                                                                                          APICAL-                            R
                                                                                                                                                                         POSTERIOR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                    BE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LO
                                                                                       APICAL
                                                                  LO

                                                                                                     ST

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                   PO
                                                         R
                                                      RIO

                                                                                                                INFER

                                                                                                                                                                                                ANTERIOR
                                                                                                        OR

                                                                                                                                                              SUPERIOR
                                                    PE

                                                                                                      ERI
                                                  SU

                                                                                                                     IOR LO
                                                                                                     SUP

                                                                  ANTERIOR                                                                                                                   SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PE
                                                                                                                                       LOBE

                                                                                                                                                                                                       RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                      BE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ULAR)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                        POSTERIOR

                                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                                              POSTERIOR
                                                                                                                                         INFERIOR

                                                                                                                                                                                            FE
                                                                                                          BASAL

                                                                                                                                                                BASAL

                                                                                                                                                                                 ANT.            RI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D IIOR (LING
                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                  MEDIAL                   MED.                                                                                  MED.                  R

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VISIO
                                                                                           BAS.                                                                                 BASAL
                                             MID

                                                                                       ANT.                                                                                          LAT.                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IN F E
                                                  DL

                                                                                       BAS. L.B.                                                                                     BAS.
                                                              LO
                                                              E

                                                                     BE

                                                                    Medial and basal view                                                                            Medial and basal view

                                           Figure 5-4. Segmental anatomy of the lungs. (Reproduced with permission from Clemente
                                           CD: Gray’s Anatomy, 30th American edition. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1985.)

                                 then extended and held in position with either an airplane holder or an arm board with several pillows (Fig.
                                 5-3B). The lower leg should be flexed, and the upper leg should be left extended and supported by pillows. The
                                 back is kept in a vertical position while the beanbag is evacuated of air (blanket bolsters may be placed next to
                                 the patient). Wide adhesive tape is placed across the hips to further secure the patient. A lower-body warming
                                 blanket (e.g., Bair Hugger) should be used to avoid hypothermia. To facilitate closure, the table can be returned
                                 to the flat position. Ideally, this is accompanied by inflation, and subsequent deflation, of the beanbag. The
                                 anesthesiologist may be asked to exert downward pressure on the patient’s shoulder to diminish tension on the
                                 latissimus dorsi closure.
                                 Although the standard posterolateral thoracotomy involves division of the latissimus dorsi and serratus anterior
                                 muscles, muscle-sparing incisions—either transverse or vertical—are gaining in popularity because they are

===== PAGE 281 =====
Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy           281

                   perceived to decrease pain and provide a more rapid recovery. Variations on the posterolateral thoracotomy all have
                   position requirements similar to those of the standard posterolateral incision.
                   For an anterior incision, the patient is placed supine. A small roll placed under the shoulder blades will serve to
                   extend the neck and facilitate access to the upper mediastinum. This is particularly important for an operation on the
                    upper trachea and improves visualization for cervical mediastinoscopy. In general, the arms should be tucked at the
                    patient’s sides. Having an arm extended during a sternotomy can place undue stretch on the brachial plexus → injury.
                   The probability of DVT in general thoracic cases is controversial, whereas the risks of prophylaxis are minimal. Given
                   that patients undergoing thoracotomy often have protracted periods of immobility, both during and after surgery,
                   and often have a Dx of a malignant disease (hypercoagulability), use of DVT prophylaxis is good practice. We use
                   SCDs for all patients, except those undergoing short video-assisted procedures and reserve subcutaneous heparin
                   for those at higher than normal risk (e.g., with prolonged postop immobility).

                   POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES
                   The most common postop issues relevant to anesthesiologists are

                                                                                                                                                     Thoracic Surgery
                         • The need for postop mechanical ventilation;
                         • Airway management;
                         • Hemodynamic instability; and
                         • Pain control.

                   The majority of patients undergoing thoracotomy can be extubated immediately postop. The most common excep-
                   tions are patients requiring preop mechanical ventilation, lung transplant patients, and those with “difficult” airways.
                   Patients undergoing prolonged surgery may require postop mechanical ventilation. With shorter procedures, and
                   those performed using minimally invasive techniques, even patients undergoing lung-volume-reduction surgery for
                   severe emphysema generally can be extubated at the conclusion of the procedure.
                   Because DLTs are larger than standard ETTs, there is greater potential for laryngeal trauma and airway edema → loss
                   of airway following extubation. By exchanging the DLT for a single-lumen ETT over a tube changer, this potentially
                   catastrophic complication can be avoided.
                   Hemodynamic instability following surgery may be 2° several causes, the most important being ongoing blood loss
                   (or inadequate intraop fluid replacement) and cardiac dysfunction. Use of epidural anesthesia may accentuate ↓ BP
                   both intraop and postop.
                   With the use of epidural anesthesia and systemic analgesics (e.g., ketorolac) postop pain can be managed effectively.
                   It is important for the anesthesiologist to communicate to the surgeon (and postop care team) which agents have
                   been used, how the patient responded to them, and what types of hemodynamic, pulmonary, and neurological effects
                   can be expected in the postop period.

                   LOBECTOMY, PNEUMONECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Surgery remains the most appropriate form of treatment for early-stage lung cancer. Other less
                   common indications include infection (particularly mycobacterial disease and bronchiectasis), developmental
                    abnormalities such as sequestrations, and trauma. Patients with Stage I or II non-small-cell lung cancer (disease
                     confined to the lung or those with intrapulmonary node involvement only) generally are offered surgery, unless
                     their pulmonary function is prohibitively poor or their comorbidities pose an unacceptable risk. Patients with Stage
                     IIIA disease often receive preop chemotherapy and/or radiation; and those with Stage IIIB or IV disease are rarely
                     offered an operation.

===== PAGE 282 =====
282   s e c t i o n 5.0       Thoracic Surgery

                                 Table 5-1. Spirometric Criteria for Pulmonary Resection
                                 Spirometry                                                           Operable                              Further Study Suggested
                                 Forced vital capacity (FVC)                                          > 60% predicted                       < 60% predicted
                                 Forced expired volume in 1 see (FEV1)                                > 60% predicted                       < 60% predicted
                                 FEV1 FVC ratio                                                       > 50%                                 < 50%
                                 Maximum voluntary ventilation                                        > 50% predicted                       < 50% predicted
                                 Gas exchange
                                    Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide                            > 60% predicted                       < 60% predicted
                                    Arterial carbon dioxide tension                                   < 45 mm Hg                            > 45 mm Hg
                                 Used with permission from Olson GN: Pulmonary physiologic assessment of operative risk. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General Thoracic
                                 Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Regardless of the underlying disease, the preoperative evaluation should include an assessment of pulmonary func-
                                 tion (Table 5-1). Spirometry is adequate for most patients with little or no functional impairment, but more elaborate
                                 tests—such as measurement of diffusion capacity, quantitative ventilation/perfusion scans, or formal exercise testing
                                 (Fig. 5-5)—are appropriate for others.
                                 Following induction of general anesthesia, many surgeons perform a preoperative bronchoscopy. In patients
                                 with tumors in the trachea or mainstem bronchi, this step may be important in determining whether the p
                                                                                                                                        atient
                                 should undergo a lobectomy, sleeve lobectomy, or pneumonectomy. Most patients undergoing lobectomy or
                                 pneumonectomy are placed in the lateral decubitus position. This approach permits a lateral or posterolateral
                                 thoracotomy (Fig. 5-1A)—the incision that provides optimal exposure of the pulmonary hilum. A more limited,
                                 muscle-sparing incision may be used; however, the exposure may be somewhat limited. Occasionally, a median
                                 sternotomy approach (Fig. 5-1B) is used–particularly when there is significant involvement of the anterior
                                 mediastinum by the tumor.
                                 Over the past several years, video-assisted thoracoscopic lobectomy (VATS-lobectomy) has become more widely
                                 available. Although the anesthetic and surgical details of VATS techniques are described later in the chapter, early
                                 experiences with this procedure have demonstrated similar outcomes to those associated with the more traditional
                                 open techniques. Although a limited “access” thoracotomy is necessary to remove the mobilized lobe from the chest
                                 cavity, the technique has the advantages of minimizing soft tissue trauma and the pain associated with spreading the
                                 ribs.
                                 Following entry into the chest, the lung on the operative side is allowed to deflate. If the lung remains inflated,
                                 a flexible bronchoscope should be used to verify correct positioning of the DLT (Fig. 5-6). Alternatively, the
                                 surgeon may be able to feel the tip of the DLT and guide it into the correct position. After stable OLV has been
                                 obtained, the lung is mobilized and the bronchovascular structures are identified. Generally, the vascular struc-
                                 tures are divided first although, when exposure is limited, it may be best to divide the bronchus first. Hypotension
                                 and arrhythmias may occur when the hilar structures or pericardium are retracted vigorously. Such aberrations
                                 generally resolve quickly on restoration of normal anatomic relationships. Inadvertent entry into a branch of the
                                 pulmonary artery during dissection can result in rapid blood loss. Because these vessels are usually under low
                                 pressure, bleeding generally can be controlled with direct pressure on the bleeding site, while the anesthesiolo-
                                 gist resuscitates the patient and the surgeon obtains more definitive vascular control. During a lobectomy, the
                                 surgeon will ask the anesthesiologist to reinflate the lung while the bronchus leading to the lobe that will be
                                 removed is occluded. This will ensure that the remaining lobes inflate appropriately. Thorough suctioning imme-
                                 diately before the lobectomy eliminates secretions as a cause of continued atelectasis. Once the lung or lobe has
                                 been resected, positive pressure is applied to the bronchial stump (and lobe) to check that there is no significant
                                 postop air leak. Large air leaks are best addressed at the time of surgery, rather than waiting for them to resolve
                                 postop.
                                 Chest drainage is standard following lobectomy and involves placement of one or two 28–36 Fr chest tubes attached
                                 to underwater seal or suction. Placing the tubes to suction typically increases observed air leak, whereas extubat-
                                 ing the patient in the supine position typically decreases the leak. Following pneumonectomy, chest drainage is
                                 not uniformly carried out; however, if a chest tube is to be placed, a balanced drainage system must be used or the

===== PAGE 283 =====
Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy           283

                                                      Patient with Anatomically
                                                      Resectable Lung Cancer

                                                             Spirometry
                                                         Diffusing Capacity

                              FEV1                                         FEV1
                               and > 60% Predicted                          or < 60% Predicted
                              DLCO                                         DLCO

                                                                        Estimate Postoperative Function
                                                                         using Quantitative Lung Scan

                                                                                                                                                      Thoracic Surgery
                                                                             or Segment Counting

                                         Offer                        Predicted                    Predicted
                                        Surgery                     Postoperative                Postoperative
                                                                   FEV1 and DLCO                FEV1 and DLCO
                                                                       > 40%                        < 40%

                                                                                  Exercise Study

                                                                  Exercise VO2 max              Exercise VO2 max
                                                                   < 15 mL/kg/min                < 15 mL/kg/min

                                                                                      Predicted Post-op     Predicted Post-op
                                                                                      Exercise VO2 max       Exercise VO2 max
                                                                                       > 10 mL/kg/min         < 10 mL/kg/min

                                                                                                            Discuss Alternatives
                                                                                                          Rehab – LVRS/Resection
                                                                                                               Radiotherapy
                                                                                                               Chemotherapy

                               Figure 5-5. Physiologic assessment of patients with compromised lung function.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Olson GN: Pulmonary physiologic assessment of
                               operative risk. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General Thoracic Surgery,
                               5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

                   mediastinum will shift to the operative side, thus creating adverse hemodynamic consequences. An alternative to
                   drainage (after the patient is placed supine) is to aspirate air from the operative pleural space until a slight negative
                   pressure is obtained.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of the lung; infection; developmental abnormalities; trauma

===== PAGE 284 =====
Thoracic Surgery   284   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                             Figure 5-6. Use of a fiberoptic bronchoscope to ensure correct positioning of a left-
                                             side DLT. (Reproduced with permission from Fry WA: Thoracic incisions. In: Shields
                                             TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott
                                             Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                          Lobectomy                                            Pneumonectomy

                                  Position                Lateral/supine                                       ⇐

                                  Incision                Posterolateral/median sternotomy/VATS                ⇐

                                  Special                 DLT; SCD or TED hose                                 ⇐
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g                                        ⇐

                                  Surgical time           2–3 h                                                ⇐

                                  EBL                     < 500 mL (more in redo or inflammatory cases)        ⇐

                                  Postop care             PACU ± ICU; careful attention to pulmonary toilet;   ⇐ + Special balanced drainage tube
                                                          chest tube output

                                  Mortality               ± 1%                                                 ± 5%

                                  Morbidity               Dysrhythmias: 10–20%                                 30–40%
                                                          DVT: 5–20%                                           ⇐
                                                          ARDS                                                 ⇐
                                                          PE                                                   ⇐
                                                          MI                                                   ⇐
                                                          Bronchopleural fistula                               ⇐
                                                          Chylothorax                                          ⇐
                                                          Subcutaneous emphysema                               ⇐
                                                          Phrenic nerve injury                                 ⇐
                                                          Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury                     ⇐

                                  Pain score              7–8                                                  7–8

===== PAGE 285 =====
Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy           285

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              0–80 yr

                     Male:Female            15:1

                     Incidence              Common thoracic procedure; increasing in females

                     Etiology               Smoking

                     Associated             Cardiopulmonary disease; PVD
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                  Thoracic Surgery
                   The main indication for lung resection is neoplasm. Other indications include infection, hemorrhage, or air-leak. The
                   majority of patients have a Hx of cigarette smoking with associated emphysema and/or chronic bronchitis. As most
                   patients are older, other comorbidities are common (CAD, DM). Morbidity and mortality following thoracotomy is
                   increased with preexisting pulmonary, cardiovascular, and neurologic disease. Lung resections are increasingly being
                   performed via thoracoscopy, which decreases patient morbidity. Lung isolation (DLT or BB) and OLV are mandatory
                   for surgical exposure.

                    Respiratory             Question patient about exercise tolerance, dyspnea, productive cough and cigarette
                                            smoking. Examine patient for cyanosis, clubbing, RR, and pattern. Listen to chest for
                                            wheezes, rhonchi, rales. Timely cessation of smoking (> 8 wk), adequate management
                                            of bronchospasm with bronchodilator treatment ± steroids, and prompt treatment of
                                            preexisting lung infections are important to reduce postop pulmonary complications.
                                            Tests: PFT (see below and Table 5-2); CXR; chest CT (if available), always examine chest
                                            imaging re: ease of lung isolation; ABG (only if indicated from H&P).

                    Pulmonary               Nonsmoker with normal lungs may not require any studies for simple lobectomy. Any
                      function               re-existing respiratory disease (or possibility of pneumonectomy) should trigger lung
                                            p
                                            function studies. Whole-lung tests (ABG, spirometry) are sufficient in most cases. Split-
                                            function lung tests (V/Q scan) should be considered if the patient has heterogeneous
                                            disease, or a planned pneumonectomy or borderline lung resection is planned. Many vari-
                                            ables have been shown to correlate with poor outcome. The most important are FEV1,
                                            DLCO, and VO2 max, which focus on different aspects (mechanics, parenchymal function,
                                            and cardio-pulmonary reserve, respectively). Postoperative predictive values of FEV1 < 40%,
                                            DLCO < 40%, or baseline VO2max < 15 mL/kg/min predict ↑ risk for postop complications
                                            following pulmonary resection. Preop hypercapnia or PHTN/ RV dysfunction are relative
                                            contraindications to lung resection, except for specific circumstances (e.g., combined with
                                            LVRS in severe emphysema). Trial pneumonectomy with PA balloon occlusion is frequent-
                                            ly discussed, but not used in clinical practice. Preop optimization of respiratory function
                                            with bronchodilator therapy should be routine.

                    Cardiovascular          RV dysfunction is a relative contraindication to lung resection (particularly pneumonec-
                                            tomy). Prophylactic digoxin or amiodarone to ↓ risk of postop atrial fibrillation have lim-
                                            ited efficacy.
                                            Tests: ECG—look for evidence of RV hypertrophy, conduction problems, ischemia, and
                                            prior MI. ECHO to evaluate ventricular function; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Neurological            3 Hx of previous back surgery, peripheral neuropathy. Examine thoracolumbar area for
                                            skin lesions, infection, deformities.

                    Musculoskeletal         Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome with resistance
                                            to depolarizing muscle relaxants and ↑ sensitivity to NDMRs. Monitor relaxation with
                                            peripheral nerve stimulator.

===== PAGE 286 =====
286   s e c t i o n 5.0       Thoracic Surgery

                                 Table 5-2. Assessment of Risk of Postop Pulmonary Complications
                                 Following Thoracic and Abdominal Procedures
                                 Category                                                                                                                               Point
                                   I. Expiratory Spirogram
                                      a. Normal (%FVC + %FEV1/FVC > 150)                                                                                                0
                                      b. %FVC + %FEV1/FVC = 100–150                                                                                                     1
                                      c. %FVC + %FEV1/FVC < 100                                                                                                         2
                                      d. Preop FVC < 20 mL/kg                                                                                                           3
                                      e. Post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC < 50%                                                                                             3
                                  II. Cardiovascular System
                                      a. Normal                                                                                                                         0
                                      b. Controlled HTN, Ml sequelae for more than 2 yr                                                                                 0
                                      c. Dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, dependent edema. CHF, angina                                     1
                                 III. ABGs
                                      a. Acceptable                                                                                                                     0
                                      b. PaCO2 >50 mm Hg or PaO2 < 60 mm Hg on room air                                                                                 1
        Thoracic Surgery

                                      c. Metabolic pH abnormality > 7.50 or < 7.30                                                                                      1
                                 IV. Nervous System
                                     a. Normal                                                                                                                          0
                                     b. Confusion, obtundation, agitation, spasticity, discoordination, bulbar malfunction                                              1
                                     c. Significant muscular weakness                                                                                                   1
                                  V. Postop Ambulation
                                     a. Expected ambulation (minimum, sitting at bedside) within 36 h                                                                   0
                                     b. Expected complete bed confinement for at least 36 h                                                                             1

                                     0 Points = Low Risk; 1–2 Points = Moderate Risk; 3 Points = High Risk
                                 With permission, Shapira BA, Harrison RA, Kacmarek RM, Cane RD: Clinical Application of Respiratory Care, 3rd edition. Year Book Medical Publishers,
                                 Chicago: 1985.

                                 Hematologic                     Adequate O2-carrying capacity is important. Optimize Hb preoperatively if possible (iron,
                                                                 EPO), consider transfusion with Hb < 7 g/dL (<10 g/dL with CAD), depending on vital
                                                                 signs. Although rare, bleeding can be profuse, so blood should be immediately available.
                                                                 Coagulopathy may preclude neuraxial anesthesia.
                                                                 Tests: Hct; PT; PTT (if epidural anesthesia planned)

                                 Laboratory                      Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication                   Midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv if patient anxious (unless respiratory compromise). When epidural
                                                                 opioids are planned, avoid additional systemic opioid or sedative premedication that can
                                                                 potentiate postop respiratory effects of neuraxial opioids.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: Combined GA with continuous regional technique (epidural or paravertebral). Anesthesia
                                 for lobectomy/pneumonectomy relies on OLV techniques to improve surgical exposure and minimize damage to the
                                 operative lung in the case of lobectomy or bi-lobectomy. The challenges to the anesthesiologist include maintaining
                                 adequate oxygenation in patients with poor pulmonary reserve and ensuring that the patient is comfortable, warm,
                                 and awake at the end of surgery.

                                 Preinduction                    Placement of a regional analgesia catheter is important for postop pain control. Con-
                                                                 tinuous epidural (lumbar or thoracic) and paravertebral blocks have been shown to be
                                                                 effective. Epidural catheters should be placed in the awake patient, whereas paravertebral
                                                                  catheters can be sited asleep or intraop under direct vision. The catheter tip should be as
                                                                  close as possible to the level of incision to minimize the sympathectomy. Intraop use of

===== PAGE 287 =====
Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy            287

                    Preinduction      regional analgesia reduces the amount of systemic anesthetics/analgesics required and,
                      (cont’d)        therefore, facilitates rapid emergence. An adequate block can be established with lidocaine
                                      or bupivacaine; however, higher concentrations will be required for intraop anesthesia
                                      than postop analgesia.

                    Induction         Standard induction (p. B-2). If flexible bronchoscopy is planned prior to lung resec-
                                      tion, intubate with an ETT (≥ 8 mm), which will be replaced with DLT after bronchos-
                                      copy (see below). Otherwise, proceed to intubation with an appropriate sized DLT
                                      (check imaging, rough guideline: adult male, 39–41 Fr; adult female, 35–37 Fr) after
                                      induction.

                    Maintenance       Air/O2 and isoflurane/desflurane/sevoflurane (around 0.5–0.7 MAC if neuraxial block
                                      established). Avoid N2O. Use high FiO2 = 0.8–1.0 at onset of OLV; titrate to lowest pos-
                                      sible after HPV well established and operative lung collapsed. A local anesthetic (e.g.,
                                      2% lidocaine or 0.25–0.5% bupivacaine) can be infused or injected hourly into a thoracic
                                      (1–3 mL) or lumbar (5–10 mL) epidural catheter. Continuous infusion of local anesthetic
                                      generally provides better hemodynamic stability than hourly bolus injection. To enhance

                                                                                                                                                Thoracic Surgery
                                      the effect of epidural analgesia, a loading dose of epidural opiate (e.g., hydromorphone
                                      200–500 mcg [thoracic] or 1–1.5 mg [lumbar]) can be administered prior to incision.
                                      Epidural hydromorphone has a superior side-effect profile over morphine at equipotent
                                      doses. IV (compared to inhalational) anesthetics have a clinically insignificant benefit on
                                      OLV oxygenation (particularly if volatile agents are limited to < 1 MAC) and are, there-
                                      fore, not necessary in the majority of cases.

                    Emergence          Before chest closure, lungs are inflated gradually to 20–30 cmH2O pressure to rein-
                                      flate atelectatic areas and to 3 for significant air leaks. Surgeon inserts chest tubes
                                      to drain pleural cavity and aid lung reexpansion. Patient is extubated in OR. If
                                      p ostop ventilation is required (rare), DLT exchanged for single-lumen ETT. Patient
                                       transferred in head-elevated position to PACU or ICU, breathing mask O2. If hemo-
                                       dynamically unstable, monitor ECG, pulse oximetry, and arterial pressure during
                                       transfer.

                    Blood and fluid   IV: 18 ga × 1 + 14 or 16 ga × 1          Postop, PVR is increased in proportion to the
                       requirements   Maintain stable hypovolemia, Limit       amount of lung tissue removed. An overhydrat-
                                        fluid to 10–15 mL/kg if possible       ed patient is at risk of RV failure and pulmonary
                                      Blood: available, but rarely required;   edema. Replace blood loss with colloid (1:1) to
                                        use vasopressor (ephedrine 5–10        minimize volume load. Third-space loss is negligi-
                                        mg iv bolus or phenylephrine           ble and need not be replaced. Use of epidural local
                                        50–100 mcg iv bolus) if hypo-         anesthetics can cause ↓ BP in a volume-restricted
                                        tensive.                               patient; vasopressor may be needed.

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (p. B-1)                It is mandatory to follow oxygenation continuously
                                      Arterial line                             during OLV. Typically, this can be done with pulse
                                      Urinary catheter                          oximetry, although continuous intraarterial PO2
                                                                                
                                      ± CVP line                               monitoring is now commercially available. CVP
                                      ± PA line or TEE (rare)                  and/or PA line optional for pneumonectomy and for
                                                                               patients with coexisting cardiac disease. CVP moni-
                                                                                toring may be inaccurate intraop and is mostly placed
                                                                                for postop care. PA lines are rarely necessary and may
                                                                                interfere with PA stapling or endanger the PA stump.
                                                                                TEE may be of benefit in the borderline pneumonec-
                                                                                tomy to check for RV tolerance of PA cross-clamp.

                    Positioning       Axillary roll, “airplane” for upper      3 radial pulses to ensure correct placement of axil-
                                      arm                                      lary roll (if misplaced, will compromise distal puls-
                                      Avoid hyperextending arms                es). Placing the oximeter probe on the down arm
                                      3 and pad pressure points                may assist in monitoring arm perfusion.
                                      3 eyes, ears, genitals

===== PAGE 288 =====
288   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Fiberoptic               FOB performed immediately before        Use the largest DLT that atraumatically passes through
                                    bronchoscopy          thoracotomy to evaluate resectabil-     the glottis (typically, 39–41 Fr for men, 35–37 Fr for
                                                          ity of lesion. Patient intubated with   women). DLT can be placed accurately by careful aus-
                                                          large ETT (≥ 8 mm), replaced with       cultation ±confirmation by FOB. For a DLT, fiberoptic
                                                          DLT or BB following bronchoscopy        confirmation is done both through the tracheal lumen
                                                          (see Bronchoscopy, p. 320).             to confirm that the blue bronchial cuff is not hemiat-
                                                                                                  ing above the carina, and through the bronchial lumen
                                                                                                  to confirm that the end of the tube is not abutting the
                                                                                                  secondary carina (L-DLT), or through the bronchial
                                                                                                  lumen to confirm the end of the tube is in the bronchus
                                                                                                  intermedius and the opening in the blue bronchial cuff
                                                                                                  is facing the (R)UL orifice (R-DLT). For small children,
                                                                                                  the balloon of a Fogarty embolectomy catheter is used
                                                                                                  as a BB; for adults, either a BB or a Univent tube may be
                                                                                                  used if the proper size DLT cannot be placed. BB not
                                                                                                  ideal as FOB always needed to confirm placement, lung
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                                                                  collapse delayed, suction and CPAP not effective and
                                                                                                  repeated inflation and collapse may be difficult.

                                 Lung isolation           Separate lungs to prevent contralateral
                                                          contamination (infection, pus, blood,
                                                          tumor), allow selective ventilation and
                                                          facilitate operation.

                                 OLV                      Two lung vent:                           Issues during OLV are oxygenation, ventilation, and
                                                            Vt = 8–10 mL/kg,                       lung injury. Oxygenation is rarely an issue if the DLT
                                                            normocapnia,                           is adequately placed and derecruitment is avoided
                                                            PEEP 3–5 cm H2O                        in the nonoperative lung. Ventilation is impaired
                                                          OLV:                                     by the smaller lumen of the DLT and the fact that
                                                            Vt = 4–8 mL/kg,                        only one lung is ventilated, resulting in higher venti-
                                                           permissive hypercapnia (PaCO2          latory pressures. However, permissive hypoventila-
                                                            50–70 mm Hg),                          tion allows for limiting the ventilatory stress. Acute
                                                            PEEP 3–8 cm H2O (unless BPF),          lung injury may result in postpneumonectomy pul-
                                                            FiO2: 0.6–1.0,                         monary edema, which may occur even after lesser
                                                           PIP < 35 cm H2O and plateau           resections. Limiting Vt, peak and plateau pressures,
                                                            pressures < 25 cm H2O,                 FiO2, duration of OLV and atelectasis formation
                                                            consider PCV.                         help to minimize the risk.

                                 Complications            Hypoxemia                               Hypoxemia is now relatively infrequent due to bet-
                                                                                                  ter lung isolation techniques and anesthetic agents
                                                                                                  with less suppression of HPV. If hypoxemia occurs,
                                                                                                  tube position should immediately be confirmed and
                                                                                                  FiO2 increased toward 1.0. Suctioning of secretions
                                                                                                   and lung recruitment maneuvers are often all that
                                                                                                   is required. If derecruitment has occurred, higher
                                                                                                  levels of PEEP should be employed; however, this
                                                                                                   may potentially worsen oxygenation. CPAP to the
                                                                                                   (recruited) operative lung is always helpful, as is
                                                                                                   clamping of the PA to exclude shunt flow. Return to
                                                                                                   two-lung ventilation (if possible) will always improve
                                                                                                   oxygenation (even if used intermittently only) and
                                                                                                   should be considered with refractory hypoxemia.
                                                          Hypercarbia                              Mild hypercarbia is well tolerated except in the setting
                                                                                                   of severe PHTN. CO2 levels above 70 mm Hg may be
                                                                                                  associated with tachycardia, dysrhythmias, and car-
                                                                                                  diac depression. Treat with higher minute ventilation.
                                                          Arrhythmia                              3 for mechanical compression of heart or great
                                                                                                  vessels.

===== PAGE 289 =====
Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy              289

                    Complications              Hypotension                                 3 volume status (but always hypovolemic) and car-
                      (cont’d)                                                             diac function. Consider neosynephrine for BP sup-
                                                                                           port if ↓ BP is 2° epidural.
                                               Airway rupture                              3 integrity of intubated bronchus after reexpand-
                                                                                           ing lung.
                                               DVT                                         Preventive measures: TED hose or SCD.
                                               Airway trauma from intubation,              Force should NEVER be used during insertion of a
                                               tracheobronchial rupture                    DLT, as it may result in catastrophic airway disrup-
                                                                                           tions. Do not overdistend bronchial balloon or DLT
                                                                                           cuffs. DLT bronchial cuff usually requires < 2 mL
                                                                                           air for airtight seal, if an appropriate (large) DLT is
                                                                                           used.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                                Thoracic Surgery
                    Complications              Injuries related to lateral                 Pressure damage to ear, eye, nose, deltoid muscle,
                                               positioning                                 iliac crest, brachial plexus, and radial, ulnar, com-
                                                                                           mon peroneal, and sciatic nerves have all been
                                                                                           reported.
                                               Structural injuries related to              Neurologic (phrenic and recurrent laryngeal
                                               thoracotomy                                 nerves), thoracic duct, spinal cord; bronchopleural
                                                                                           fistula, tracheobronchial disruption
                                               Surgical complications                      Cardiac herniation, tension pneumothorax, bleed-
                                                                                           ing, torsion of residual lobe, acute lung injury/
                                                                                           ARDS
                                               Cardiopulmonary complications               Supraventricular dysrhythmias, SVT, acute RV
                                                                                           failure, atelectasis, BPF, pneumonia, PE. For
                                                                                           SVT, treat underlying cause and correct elec-
                                                                                           trolyte a bnormalities. Most postop SVTs are 2°
                                                                                           atrial fi
                                                                                                   brillation or 2° catecholamine surge and
                                                                                           may resolve spontaneously. Hemodynamically
                                                                                           unstable patients will require cardioversion. Beta-
                                                                                            blockers, amiodarone, Ca++ channel blockers, and
                                                                                            over-drive cardiac pacing are effective in patients
                                                                                            with unstable AF.

                    Pain                       Neuraxial opioids—epidural or               Effective analgesia via epidural or paraverte-
                      management               intrathecal                                 bral route is essential for patient to cough, deep
                                               Parenteral opioids (iv, im, continu-        breathe, and ambulate early. Epidural infusions
                                               ous iv, PCA [p. C-3])                       consist of a local anesthetic + opioid mixture
                                               Intercostal blocks                          (smaller volume and higher concentration with
                                               Interpleural analgesia                      thoracic placement). Paravertebral infusions are
                                                                                           local anesthetic only, thereby avoiding opioid side
                                               Epidural local anesthetics                  effects. Paravertebral analgesia interferes less with
                                               Cryoanalgesia                               postop lung function than epidural analgesia.
                                                                                           Ketorolac (10–15 mg) is helpful as adjunct analge-
                                               NSAID (ketorolac)                           sic, particularly with referred shoulder pain.

                    Tests                      Hct, CXR, ABG, and others as indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Alam N, Flores RM: Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) lobectomy: the evidence base. JSLS 2007; 11(3):368–74.
                     2. Amar D: Perioperative atrial tachyarrhythmias. Anesthesiology 2002; 97(6):1618–23.
                     3. Beckles MA, Sprio SG, Colice GL, et al: Initial evaluation of the patient with lung cancer: symptoms, signs, laboratory tests,
                        and paraneoplastic syndromes. Chest 2003; 123:S1, 97S–104S.

===== PAGE 290 =====
290   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                   4. Beckles MA, Sprio SG, Colice GL, et al: The physiologic evaluation of patients with lung cancer being considered for
                                      resectional surgery. Chest 2003; 123:S1, 105S–14S.
                                   5. Bernstein WK, Deshpande S: Preoperative evaluation for thoracic surgery. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2008;
                                      12(2):109–21.
                                   6. Brodsky JB, Macario A, Mark JBD: Tracheal diameter predicts double-lumen tube size: a method for selecting left double-
                                      lumen tubes. Anesth Analg 1996; 82:861–4.
                                   7. Davies RG, Myles PS, Graham JM: A comparison of the analgesic efficacy and side-effects of paravertebral vs epidural
                                      blockade for thoracotomy—a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Br J Anaesth 2006; 96(4):418–26.
                                   8. Fortier G, Cote D, Bergeron C, et al: New landmarks improve the positioning of the left Broncho-Cath double-lumen tube-
                                      comparison with the classic technique. Can J Anaesth 2001; 48(8):790–4.
                                   9. Lohser J: Evidence-based management of one-lung ventilation. Thorac Anesth Anesthesiol Clin North America 2008; 26(2):
                                      accepted.
                                  10. McKenna RJ Jr, Houck W, Fuller CB: Video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy: experience with 1,100 cases. Ann Thorac
                                      Surg 2006; 81(2):421–5; discussion 425–6.
                                  11. Slinger P: Update on anesthetic management for pneumonectomy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22(1):31–7.
                                  12. Slinger PD: Postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema: good news, bad news. Anesthesiology 2006; 105(1):2–5.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 WEDGE RESECTION OF LUNG LESION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Wedge resection (removal of a mass in a manner that does not remove an entire anatomical pulmo-
                                 nary segment) may be carried out for a number of reasons. A known or suspected cancer may be removed by this
                                 limited resection. There is general agreement that this is an appropriate operation for patients with peripheral non-
                                 small-cell tumors and who have pulmonary reserve limited to the point that they are unable to tolerate lobectomy.
                                 Wedge resection also is used for resection of single- or multiple-metastatic lesions from various primary neoplasms.
                                 A single metastasis may be removed through a limited thoracotomy incision. At the other extreme, a median ster-
                                 notomy may be used to remove bilateral lesions. Wedge resection also is indicated for diagnostic and therapeutic
                                 purposes in lesions that defy diagnosis by less-invasive techniques. Incisions vary with location, number of lesions,
                                 and technique used. Limited thoracotomy, standard thoracotomy, or median sternotomy may be used under
                                 different circumstances. Stapling (Fig. 5-7), clamp and suture technique, or excision and suture technique may be

                                           Figure 5-7. Stapler used to perform wedge incision. (Reproduced with permission
                                           from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy. Lippincott Williams &
                                           Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 291 =====
Wedge Resection of Lung Lesion   291

                   used for lesions in different locations. Wedge resection is best performed in the lateral position and with OLV. Small
                   nodules on the edge of the lung and diagnostic biopsies for interstitial lung disease often can be performed with the
                   thoracoscope, thereby avoiding a thoracotomy. In patients who cannot tolerate OLV (e.g., with ARDS), it may be
                   necessary to keep the patient supine and ventilate both lungs. The wedge resection itself generally is carried out with
                   a surgical stapling device (Fig. 5-7) that simultaneously staples the lung parenchyma and cuts between staple lines.
                   Alternatively, the lung tissue can be clamped and oversewn—a technique applicable to particularly indurated lung
                   tissue that is too thick for a stapler. A final option is to perform a pneumonotomy, enucleate the nodule, and suture
                   the lung closed. A single chest tube usually is placed for postop chest drainage.
                   Variant approach: Video-assisted thoracoscopy surgery (VATS; see p. 326).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Metastatic tumor to the lungs; primary lung cancer (typically, lobectomy); unknown pul-
                   monary lesion

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                    Position                Lateral or supine

                                                                                                                                                    Thoracic Surgery
                    Incision                Limited and related to location of solitary lesion; sternotomy for bilateral lesions

                    Special                 DLT
                      instrumentation

                    Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g (or other antibiotic as indicated from culture and sensitivity)

                    Surgical time           < 1–3 h, depending on number of lesions

                    EBL                     < 500 mL

                    Postop care             PACU ± ICU; careful attention to pulmonary toilet, chest tube output

                    Mortality               Minimal

                    Morbidity               Air leaks
                                            Cardiac dysrhythmias

                    Pain score              2–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              30–60 yr most common

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common thoracic procedure

                     Etiology               Variable—neoplasm or inflammatory disease

                     Associated             COPD; cardiovascular disease; malignancy; infection
                       conditions

                          ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                          PREOPERATIVE
                   The anesthetic considerations for this procedure are very similar to those for lobectomy/pneumonectomy, although
                   most wedge resections are easily accomplished via thoracoscopy. Wedge resection of the lung may be performed for
                   diagnosis of interstitial process/lesion or for resection of neoplasm in patients with poor pulmonary reserve, who
                   may not tolerate an anatomic resection.

===== PAGE 292 =====
292   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Respiratory              PFTs similar to major thoracotomy. Further evaluation directed toward an underlying
                                                          disease (immunocompromised patient for open-lung biopsy, patient with metastatic
                                                          lesions).
                                                          Tests: PFTs (see Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, p. 281); CXR; chest CT (if available), always
                                                          examine chest imaging for airway problems that might interfare with lung isolation, airway
                                                          compression/obstruction; ABG (only if indicated from H&P).

                                 Cardiovascular           Tests: ECG—look for evidence of RV hypertrophy, conduction problems, ischemia, and
                                                          previous MI.

                                 Neurological             Hx of previous back surgery or peripheral neuropathy. Examine thoracolumbar area for
                                                          skin lesions, infection, deformities. The placement of an epidural catheter in patients with
                                                          neurologic problems is controversial.

                                 Musculoskeletal          Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome with resistance
                                                          to depolarizing muscle relaxants and ↑ sensitivity to NMRs. Monitor relaxation with a
                                                          peripheral nerve stimulator.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Hematologic              Patients are often anemic from primary disease. Consider preop blood transfusion or
                                                          erythropoietin therapy.
                                                          Tests: Hct

                                 Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication            Midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv if patient anxious. When epidural opioids are planned, avoid addi-
                                                          tional systemic opioid or sedative premedication, which can potentiate postop respiratory
                                                          effects of central neuraxial opioids.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA with one lung ventilation using a DLT or BB. This is often combined with an e pidural
                                 or paravertebral block. Sometimes intercostal nerve blocks are performed when the approach is thoracoscopic or
                                 when other regional techniques are contraindicated.

                                 Induction                Standard induction. Short-acting paralytic (succinylcholine 1–1.5 mg/kg or vecuronium
                                                          0.1 mg/kg or rocuronium 0.3–0.6 mg/kg for tracheal intubation)

                                 Maintenance              Balanced technique: Air-O2, isoflurane, and iv opioids (usually fentanyl). No N2O. Pain
                                                          is highly variable after thoracoscopic procedures, dependent on degree of lung dissection.
                                                          If a regional catheter is used, management should be similar to pneumonectomy/lobec-
                                                          tomy (consider lower dose of opioid). If parenteral analgesia is insufficient, useful adjuncts
                                                          include intercostal block, paravertebral block and/or intrapleural local anesthetic (given
                                                          through the chest tube after the lung is inflated [maximum 0.5 mL/kg of bupivacaine 0.25%
                                                          with epinephrine]).

                                 Emergence                Ensure complete recruitment of operative lung. Extubate in OR, transfer in head-up posi-
                                                          tion to PACU or ICU, breathing O2 by mask.

                                 Blood and fluid          IV: 16–14 ga × 1                        Replace blood loss with colloid (1:1). Third-space
                                    requirements          NS/LR @ 2 mL/kg/h (maintenance          loss is negligible and does not need to be replaced.
                                                          fluid)

                                 Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                                          ± Arterial line                         Depending on comorbidities.

                                 Positioning              Lateral decubitus or supine, with
                                                          wedge under back on operated side.
                                                          3 and pad pressure points
                                                          3 eyes, ears, genitals

===== PAGE 293 =====
Chest-Wall Resection      293

                    Ventilation              Lung isolation (DLT or BB) usually        For OLV technique, see Anesthetic Considerations
                                             required, except for easily accessible/   for Lobectomy/Pneumonectomy, p. 285.
                                             peripheral lesions. DLT superior in
                                             regard to rapidity of lung collapse.

                    Complications            See OLV under Intraop Anesthetic
                      during OLV             Considerations for Lobectomy/
                                             Pneumonectomy, p. 286.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Same as for lobectomy,                    See Postop Complications for Lobectomy, Pneumo-
                                             pneumonectomy                             nectomy, p. 289.
                                             Pain                                      Pain may at times be poorly controlled with paren-

                                                                                                                                                     Thoracic Surgery
                                                                                       teral agents alone. May require neuraxial technique
                                                                                       for rescue. More common with extensive resections
                                                                                       than simple wedge

                    Complications            See OLV under Intraop Anesthetic
                      during OLV             Considerations for Lobectomy/
                                             Pneumonectomy, p. 288.

                    Pain                     Parenteral opioids (iv, im, continu-      See Pain Management for Lobectomy, Pneumonec-
                      management             ous iv, PCA [p. C-3]).                    tomy, p. 298.
                                             Epidural
                                             Intercostal blocks
                                             Interpleural analgesia
                                             NSAID (ketorolac 10–15 mg)

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. McKenna RJ Jr, Mahtabifard A, Pickens A, et al: Fast-tracking after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy,
                        segmentectomy, and pneumonectomy. Ann Thorac Surg 2007; 84(5):1663–7.
                     2. Shah JS, Bready LL: Anesthesia for thoracoscopy. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(1):153–71.
                     3. See Pneumonectomy/ Lobectomy Suggested Readings p. 289–290.

                   CHEST-WALL RESECTION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Removal of portions of the thoracic cage may be required under several circumstances with the two
                   most common indications being (a) lung cancer that has invaded the chest wall and (b) primary chest-wall tumors
                   (the notable exceptions being Ewing’s sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma). Although preoperative chemotherapy is
                   not standard treatment for chest-wall sarcomas, some patients may have received Adriamycin, which is associated
                   with cardiotoxicity at high doses. If the tumor process involves the skin, an appropriate area of skin—typically, 4 cm
                   around the tumor—must be resected along with the specimen. Underlying subcutaneous tissue and muscle should
                   always be resected in continuity; however, the tumor itself must not be exposed. Wide skin flaps are frequently
                   necessary as well. Limited resection (1–5 cm segments of one or two ribs) generally requires no specific reconstruc-
                   tive measures, but resection of larger areas of the chest wall may require extensive reconstruction including the use

===== PAGE 294 =====
294   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 of plastic mesh replacement with or without methylmethacrylate, rib grafts and muscle, or myocutaneous flaps.
                                 Removal of anterolateral or anterior portions of the chest wall, particularly resections that include the sternum, are
                                 associated with greater postoperative instability than are resections of posterior portions of the chest wall, which are
                                 protected by the back muscles and scapula. Larger defects can be tolerated posteriorly without reconstruction, as the
                                 scapula provides chest-wall stabilization and prevents lung herniation. If a prosthesis is required, it must be covered
                                 by viable muscle to avoid erosion through the skin. Extensive reconstruction of the chest wall is often carried out in
                                 conjunction with plastic surgeons.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Lung cancer with a chest-wall attachment; primary tumor of the chest wall (bone, carti-
                                 lage, or soft tissue); radiation necrosis

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                 Supine or lateral

                                  Incision                 Over mass to be resected
        Thoracic Surgery

                                  Special                  Bone instruments; Marlex (or other) mesh; methylmethacrylate
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g (or as indicated by culture and sensitivity)

                                  Surgical time            1–8 h

                                  Closing                  May require help of plastic surgeon in extensive cases.
                                    considerations

                                  EBL                      100–2000 mL

                                  Postop care              PACU or ICU; some patients require temporary ventilatory support.

                                  Mortality                < 5%

                                  Morbidity                Paradoxical chest-wall motion (less in posterior resections)
                                                           Pneumothorax
                                                           Wound complications

                                  Pain score               3–8

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                  Age range                Adults of all ages; children, rarely

                                  Male:Female              1:1

                                  Incidence                Relatively rare

                                  Etiology                 Unknown

                                  Associated               Lung cancer; metastatic disease; smoking-related diseases; cardiovascular disease
                                    conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                 See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Pectus Excavatum or Carinatum, p. 297.

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Sellke FW, Swanson S, del Nido P: Sabiston & Spencer: Surgery of the Chest. Section I: Chest Wall, 7th edition. Elsevier
                                      Saunders, Philadelphia: 2004.

===== PAGE 295 =====
Repair of Pectus Excavatum or Carinatum          295

                   REPAIR OF PECTUS EXCAVATUM OR CARINATUM
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Standard bony and cartilaginous repair of a pectus excavatum (funnel chest) or carinatum (pigeon
                   breast) deformities is usually elective surgery with the aim of improving contour and body image. Evidence that these
                   repairs have any positive effect on cardiopulmonary function is controversial, although some surgeons feel that it can
                   be more than a cosmetic procedure—particularly in patients with prominent deformities. Recent evidence suggests
                   that, although resting cardiopulmonary function tests do not improve after pectus repairs, maximal exercise capacity
                   may improve.
                   To repair pectus excavatum, enough pairs of costal cartilages—usually four to six—must be removed to be able
                   to mobilize and elevate the sternum. Depending on the severity of the defect and patient’s age, fixation of the
                   sternum in the corrected position may be necessary. Repair of pectus carinatum is somewhat more complicated
                   because the defects are more varied—often with a rotational component as well as anteroposterior displacement;

                                                                                                                                                   Thoracic Surgery
                   however, removal of cartilages and correction of the position of the sternum are still the mainstays of treatment.
                   A midline incision provides the most satisfactory access to the cartilages and sternum. For cosmetic reasons, how-
                   ever, it may be important to use a curvilinear transverse incision, particularly in females. This incision requires
                   extensive mobilization of subcutaneous and muscle flaps. The wound complication rate is somewhat greater after
                   transverse incisions. The costal cartilages are moved by subperichondrial dissection. This may be tedious and time
                   consuming, especially because four or five, or even more, pairs of cartilages need to be removed. The elevation of
                   the sternum is usually fairly straightforward and usually is accompanied by a transverse sternal osteotomy (Fig.
                   5-8). Intercostal muscle bundles may be left attached to the sternum or may be detached and reattached for bet-
                   ter positioning of the sternum. Sternal support normally is not used in infants, but may be used in older children.

                                                                                       Osteotomy closur
                                                                                                 closure with
                                                                                       thumb pressure

                               Figure 5-8. Correction of a pectus excavatum defect in a child. After subperichondrial
                               resection of the involved costal cartilages, a wedge osteotomy permits anterior
                               mobilization of the lower portion of the sternum. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Shamberger RC: Chest wall deformities. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds.
                               General Thoracic Surgery. 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                               2000.)

===== PAGE 296 =====
296   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 One common method of support is the use of a temporary transverse metal strut resting on the ribs, but beneath
                                 the sternum. The final position of the sternum is easier to predict following repair of the pectus carinatum than
                                 following repair of pectus excavatum. Because of the negative intrathoracic pressure, it is easier to hold the ster-
                                 num down than up. Ideally, patients for repair of pectus excavatum are just under school age. Satisfactory repair,
                                 however, may be carried out at almost any time during childhood. As full growth is attained, results tend to be less
                                 favorable. Pectus carinatum generally has its onset during adolescence, and it is well to let the patient complete
                                 his or her growth spurt prior to undertaking repair. (Also see Repair of Pectus Excavatum/Carinatum in Pediatric
                                 General Surgery, p. 1301.)
                                 Variant procedure or approaches: In certain circumstances, particularly in teenage girls and patients
                                 who do not engage in strenuous sports, subcutaneous, custom-made implants may be placed to improve body
                                 contour without necessitating major bony and cartilaginous repairs. These are usually carried out by plastic
                                 surgeons.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Pectus excavatum or carinatum

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
        Thoracic Surgery

                                  Position               Supine

                                  Incision               Transverse or vertical

                                  Special                Bone instruments; sometimes metal struts or wires for reconstruction
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv q 8 h × 36–48 h

                                  Surgical time          2–3 h

                                  Closing                Pleural and wound drainage common
                                    considerations

                                  EBL                    100–500 mL

                                  Postop care            ICU

                                  Mortality              Minimal

                                  Morbidity              Pneumothorax: 5–10%
                                                         Wound infection
                                                         Sternum necrosis
                                                         Immigration of strut
                                                         Paradoxical chest-wall motion → hypoventilation/atelectasis

                                  Pain score             4–5

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                  Age range              Usually children, 5–10 yr; teenagers, sometimes; adults, rarely

                                  Male:Female            1:1

                                  Incidence              Unusual

                                  Etiology               Unknown

                                  Associated             Marfan syndrome; MVP
                                    conditions

===== PAGE 297 =====
Repair of Pectus Excavatum or Carinatum          297

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: chest-wall resection; repair of pectus excavatum/carinatum)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients for chest-wall resection often have extensive cancer and may be weak and debilitated. A very large resection
                   may create a “flail chest” situation, compromising postop ventilation.

                    Respiratory              Mild pectus seldom interferes with ventilation; no special studies indicated. Severe pectus
                                             deformity can be associated with restrictive lung defects.
                                             Tests: CXR; PFT, ABG, if indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular           With severe pectus, the heart is displaced to the left and compressed; arrhythmias and
                                             RVOTO can occur 2° impaired filling, especially during exercise or in upright position.
                                             ECG may show right axis deviation, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. A functional mur-
                                             mur may be detected. ECHO may reveal ↓ SV with MVP.
                                             Tests: ECG; cardiac catheterization if indicated. Echocardiogram if symptoms or signs

                                                                                                                                                   Thoracic Surgery
                                             suggest MVP or RVOTO.

                    Hematologic              Tests: Hct

                    Musculoskeletal          Chest-wall resection performed for invasive or metastatic cancer; patient may be mark-
                                             edly debilitated: pectus repair of chest-wall deformity for cosmetic, orthopedic, or cardio-
                                             pulmonary indications: pectus deformity usually asymptomatic.

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Consider anxiolysis with short-acting benzodiazepine. When epidural opioids are planned,
                                             minimize systemic opioid or sedative premedication to avoid potentiating postoperative
                                             respiratory depression from central neuroaxial opioids.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, occasionally combined with epidural for minimal chest-wall resection; howev-
                   er, epidural anesthesia is an excellent adjunct for extensive chest-wall resections or repair of pectus deformities.

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2). In the setting of RVOTO avoid myocardial depressants,
                                             hypovolemia and a short diastolic filling time (e.g., tachycardia). Lung isolation (DLT or
                                             BB) usually required for chest wall resections. Sequential OLV can often be accomplished
                                             with a single lumen ETT and a Rusch EZ-Blocker.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) or high-dose opioid technique (fentanyl 10–25 mcg/kg)
                                             for patient with severe RVOTO. Patients with MVP will require prophylactic antibiotics
                                             for bacterial endocarditis. OLV, if necessary, as outlined for lobectomy/pneumonectomy.

                    Emergence                Extubate in OR; if high-dose opioid →ICU for later extubation.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 18–16 ga × 1                       Usually minimal blood loss. Fluid restriction
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                    unnecessary as this is extrapulmonary operation.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                             ± Arterial line                        Close monitoring with arterial and central venous
                                                                                    catheters may be required in patients with signifi-
                                                                                    cant cardiopulmonary compromise.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                             3 eyes

===== PAGE 298 =====
298   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                 Complications               Pneumothorax                               Unintentional pleural tear can cause pneumo-
                                                                                                        thorax. Intraop deterioration characterized by ↑
                                                                                                        ventilatory pressure, hypotension, and hypoxemia
                                                                                                        suggests pneumothorax. Increase FiO2; D/C N2O.
                                                                                                        Ensure pleural space is decompressed appropriately
                                                                                                        with needle or tube thoracostomy.
                                                             Cardiac perforation                        Rare, catastrophic event reported with aberrant
                                                                                                        bar placement during minimally invasive approach.
                                                                                                        Heralded by signs of hemorrhagic or obstructive
                                                                                                        shock. Supporting bar may interfere with external
                                                                                                        cardiac compressions.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Complications               Hypoventilation                            Although most patients do not require postop ven-
                                                             Flail chest                                tilatory support, with extensive chest-wall resection,
                                                             Atelectasis/pneumonia                      patient may hypoventilate. Respiratory stimulants,
                                                                                                        such as doxapram, should be avoided as they may →
                                                                                                        deep inspirations that can → severe sternal retrac-
                                                                                                        tions. Paradoxical chest-wall movement may occur
                                                                                                        during spontaneous ventilation with flail chest;
                                                                                                        postop atelectasis 20 splinting. Obtain postop CXR.
                                                                                                        Similar to post-pericardiotomy syndrome; usually
                                                             Pericarditis                               responsive to NSAIDs though occasionally cortico-
                                                                                                        steroids or percutaneous drainage required.
                                                                                                        Following minimally invasive repair (Nuss) the
                                                             Bar displacement                           bar may become displaced and require repo-
                                                                                                        sitioning. Inadequate analgesia and absence
                                                                                                        of a stabilizing bar often cited as contributing
                                                                                                        factors.

                                 Pain                        Depends on site and extent of chest        Epidural opioids and local anesthetics are particu-
                                   management                wall resected.                             larly useful if flail chest is present—reduces need for
                                                             Parenteral or epidural opioids with        ventilatory support.
                                                             local anesthetic.

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Frantz FW: Indications and guidelines for pectus excavatum repair. Curr Opin Pediatr 2011; 23(4):486–91.
                                   2. Ghory MJ, James FW, Mays W: Cardiac performance in children with pectus excavatum. J Pediatr Surg 1989; 24(8):751–5.
                                   3. Gips H, Konstantin Z, Hiss J: Cardiac perforation by a pectus bar after surgical correction of pectus excavatum: case report
                                      and review of the literature. Pediatr Surg Int 2007.
                                   4. Iida H: Surgical repair of pectus excavatum. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2010; 58(2):55–61.
                                   5. Jacobs JP, Quintessenza JA, Morell VO, et al: Minimally invasive endoscopic repair of pectus excavatum. Eur J Cardiothorac
                                      Surg 2002; 21(5): 869–73.
                                   6. Mansour KA, Thourani VH, Odessey EA, et al: Thirty-year experience with repair of pectus deformities in adults. Ann Thorac
                                      Surg 2003; 76(2):391–5; discussion 395.
                                   7. Nuss D, Croitoru DP, Kelly RE, et al: Review and discussion of the complications of minimally invasive pectus excavatum
                                      repair. Eur J Pediatr Surg 2002; 12(4):230–4.
                                   8. Robicsek SA, Lobato EB: Repair of pectus excavatum. Anesthesia considerations. Chest Surg Clin North Am 2000; 10(2):
                                      253–9.

===== PAGE 299 =====
Thoracoplasty       299

                   THORACOPLASTY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The objective of a thoracoplasty (removal of several ribs) is to permanently obliterate an existing
                   pleural space or to collapse a portion of the lung. Formerly, this operation was used in the treatment of tuberculosis
                   (TB); however, because of better drug therapy, appropriate pulmonary resection and the decrease in incidence of TB,
                   thoracoplasty is now rare. The procedure also was used for obliterating empyema spaces and helping to close bron-
                   chopleural fistulas (BPFs). The use of pedicled muscle flaps (serratus anterior, pectoralis major, and latissimus dorsi
                   are the most common) or an omental transposition have largely replaced thoracoplasty for filling empyema spaces
                   and encouraging closing of BPFs. These operations are less deforming and better tolerated physiologically because
                   they do not result in paradoxical motion of the chest wall.
                   For patients whose lungs will never expand to fill the space—such as those who have had a pneumonectomy or who
                   have a permanently noncompliant lung—resection of multiple overlying ribs may be necessary (Fig. 5-9). Thoracoplasty

                                                                                                                                                           Thoracic Surgery
                   is accomplished by removing several ribs in a subperiosteal fashion, allowing the underlying chest wall to collapse.
                   This collapse is aided by the normally negative intrapleural pressure. Because the periosteum is left intact, the ribs will
                   regenerate, resulting in a permanent, bony collapse of the chest wall. If the objective of the thoracoplasty is to obliterate
                    a relatively small space (meaning that segments of only two to three ribs need be removed), the procedure may be done
                    in a single stage, with little postop physiologic impairment of respiration. If extensive thoracoplasty is necessary, how-
                    ever, the procedure may be done in stages to minimize postop chest-wall instability and resultant respiratory problems.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Pulmonary TB; BPF; empyema

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Usually lateral

                     Incision                 Along rib line

                     Special                  Bone instruments
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   TB or fungal infection may be present
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              As indicated by culture and sensitivity

                     Surgical time            2–3 h

                     EBL                      500 mL or more

                     Postop care              ICU

                     Mortality                Minimal

                     Morbidity                Paradoxical chest-wall motion → atelectasis → hypoxemia: 10%
                                              Pneumothorax: Rare

                     Pain score               7–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Middle-aged or older adults

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Rare

                     Etiology                 TB; pneumococcal infection; neoplasm; complication of pneumonectomy

                     Associated conditions    Immunosuppression

===== PAGE 300 =====
Thoracic Surgery   300   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                           Figure 5-9. Extrathoracic muscle flaps that may be used to obliterate a postpneumo-
                                           nectomy empyema cavity. (Reproduced with permission from Miller JI Jr: Postsurgical
                                           empyema. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General Thoracic Surgery. 5th
                                           edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                 See Anesthetic Considerations following Drainage of Empyema, p. 302.

                                 Suggested Reading
                                   1. Seify H, Mansour K, Miller J, et al: Single-stage muscle flap reconstruction of the postpneumonectomy empyema space: the
                                      Emory experience. Plast Reconstr Surg 2007; 120(7):1886–91.

                                 DRAINAGE OF EMPYEMA
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Empyema is infection within the pleural space, and the primary treatment for it is drainage. Patients may
                                 be acutely ill or they may have a history of prolonged infirmity. The most common cause of empyema is extraparenchy-
                                 mal extension of a pneumonia, although other causes include trauma, iatrogenic, and esophageal perforation. The three
                                 phases of an empyema are the exudative phase, the fibrinopurulent phase, and the organized phase. The early, or exuda-
                                 tive, phase of an empyema is usually associated with fever, dyspnea, and a pleural effusion, with the diagnosis generally
                                 being made by thoracentesis. In more established infections, patients may complain of chronic symptoms, such as pain,
                                 dyspnea, and chest heaviness, and their medical history may include several previous courses of antibiotics.

===== PAGE 301 =====
Drainage of Empyema         301

                   Treatment of empyemas is based on the stage and the underlying cause of the infection. Except in its earliest phase,
                   chest tube drainage alone rarely provides adequate therapy. In the fibrinopurulent stage, thoracoscopic drainage
                   with disruption of loculations and removal of the fine peel on the lung is enough to drain the infected fluid and allow
                   the underlying lung to expand. This procedure typically is done with the patient in the lateral position and involves
                   three thoracoscopy ports. Blood loss is generally small, although large volumes of irrigation fluid may be necessary
                   to thoroughly debride the thoracic cavity.
                   As the empyema becomes more established, the peel becomes thicker and more difficult to remove thoracoscopi-
                   cally. In such cases, an open thoracotomy is necessary. Due to the extensive intrapleural inflammation, blood and
                   fluid losses may be substantial. To identify the correct plane between the lung and the thickened pleura, the lung
                   may need to be reexpanded frequently throughout the procedure. Satisfactory drainage is accomplished when the
                   infected fluid is removed and the lung expands freely. Because the peel often intimately adheres to the underlying
                   lung, there may be a moderate postop air leak.
                   In patients too ill to undergo thoracotomy, rib resection with subsequent open drainage tube will permit the
                   underlying lung to expand over a period of several weeks. Although this may be done under local anesthesia, a
                   brief general anesthetic is often easier on the patient. In this operation, the patient is placed in the lateral posi-
                   tion and an incision is made over the rib corresponding to the most dependent portion of the empyema cavity.

                                                                                                                                                    Thoracic Surgery
                   A 6-cm length of the rib is excised and a large-diameter (≥ 50 Fr) tube is inserted into the empyema cavity. More
                   permanent open drainage is obtained by fashioning an Eloesser flap. In this procedure, a U-shaped flap of skin
                   is rotated into the empyema cavity after rib resection. This creates a long-term, skin-lined tube that will last
                   indefinitely. A varient of this procedure—the Claggett procedure—is carried out for empyema (with or without
                    bronchopleural fistula) following pneumonectomy because closed drainage rarely suffices in that situation. The
                    principle is the same: drainage is accomplished through an epithelial-lined permanent opening. The opening is
                    made anterolaterally and dependently so that drainage is effective and the patient can handle dressing changes
                    without assistance. Segments of 2-3 ribs are removed, and the skin is sutured to the parietal pleura, leaving a
                    permanent opening for drainage and irrigation. Without an underlying lung, and with a relatively fixed medias-
                    tinum, this procedure is well tolerated physiologically.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Nontuberculosis empyema (typically pneumococcal)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Eloesser or Clagett                                   Tube Thoracostomy

                     Position               Usually lateral                                       Lateral

                     Incision               Over empyema pocket for Eloesser                      Lateral

                     Special                None                                                  Large tubes
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Patient may have BPF                                  Local or GA
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            As indicated by culture and sensitivity               ⇐

                     Surgical time          1 h; occasionally more                                <1h

                     Closing                Wound left open                                       None
                       considerations

                     EBL                    100 mL                                                Minimal

                     Postop care            PACU → room                                           ⇐

                     Mortality              Minimal                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity              Fluid drainage                                        Air leak
                                            Bleeding: Rare

                     Pain score             3–4                                                   2–3

===== PAGE 302 =====
302   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                  Age range               Usually adults

                                  Male:Female             1:1

                                  Incidence               Decreasing

                                  Etiology                Pneumonia; esophageal or bronchial leak; lymphatic or hematogenous spread of infection; post-
                                                          trauma or thoracic surgery

                                  Associated              Bronchopleural fistula (BPF); sepsis; malnutrition
                                    conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 (Procedures covered: thoracoplasty; drainage of empyema)

                                      PREOPERATIVE
                                 The guiding principle in the anesthetic management of empyema is to protect the nonaffected lung from soiling by
                                 the affected side. These patients are often chronically ill with sepsis and cachexia, and there is usually an underlying
                                 BPF (which may require awake intubation).

                                 Respiratory               Patients usually have preexisting pulmonary disease. Preop pulmonary findings may
                                                           include collapse of the ipsilateral lung, impaired hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 2°
                                                           infection, and mediastinal shift to the ipsilateral side. Procedure often is performed for
                                                           empyema in the presence of BPF following lung resection (particularly pneumonectomy),
                                                           penetrating injury to chest, or rupture of a cyst or bulla. When possible, surgeon should
                                                           drain empyema under local anesthesia before induction, with patient sitting upright. If
                                                           empyema is loculated, complete drainage may not be possible.
                                                           Tests: Consider PFTs; ABG; obtain CXR to determine efficacy of preop chest drainage; if
                                                           chest CT available, look for airway obstruction that could interfere with DLT placement.

                                 Cardiovascular            There may be ECG changes because of mediastinal shift to the affected side.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                 Neurological              3 Hx of back surgery, peripheral neuropathy. Examine lumbar area for skin lesions, infec-
                                                           tion, deformities. Avoid placement of epidural catheter in patient with neurologic prob-
                                                           lems or if obviously bacteremic or septic.

                                 Musculoskeletal           Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome with resis-
                                                           tance to depolarizing muscle relaxant and ↑sensitivity to NDMRs. Monitor relaxation with
                                                           peripheral nerve stimulator.

                                 Hematologic               Transfuse patients with preop Hct < 25% or Hct < 30% in patients with CAD. (Hb level
                                                           necessary to maintain adequate O2 content.) Obtain autologous blood during the month
                                                           before surgery or consider preop erythropoietin therapy in anemic patients.

                                 Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication             Midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv if patient anxious. When epidural opioids are planned, avoid sys-
                                                           temic opioid or sedative premedication, which can potentiate postop respiratory effects of
                                                           central neuraxial opioids.

===== PAGE 303 =====
Drainage of Empyema          303

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA; combined with epidural anesthesia/analgesia if thoracotomy is indicated and patient
                   is not bacteremic or septic.

                    Induction                 Consider inhalational induction (e.g., sevoflurane) if patient has significant BPF. Semi-
                                              Fowler position with a lateral tilt to make the infected side dependent, along with rapid
                                              control of the airway followed by isolation makes contralateral contamination less likely.
                                              Rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure is an alternative (p. B-5). Intubate with
                                              DLT; isolate lungs to protect from aspiration and tension pneumothorax. Consider
                                              using DLT with bronchial lumen to side opposite BPF. Contamination of the healthy
                                              lung from aspiration of pus is a major concern; thus, proper tube position should be
                                              verified by FOB, and adequate cuff inflation should be checked. Large DLT provides
                                              snug fit in bronchus and limits aspiration. Pus may appear in tracheal lumen (lumen to
                                              the diseased lung); suction frequently to avoid soiling good lung.

                    Maintenance               O2 and isoflurane (1.0–1.5%); less required if epidural local anesthetics used. No N2O.

                                                                                                                                                     Thoracic Surgery
                                              Use FiO2 = 0.5–1.0. A local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine or
                                              0.25% bupivacaine) can be infused or injected hourly into a thoracic (3–5 mL) or lumbar
                                              (5–10 mL) epidural catheter. Continuous infusion of local anesthetic generally provides
                                              better hemodynamic stability than hourly bolus injection. To enhance the effect of epidur-
                                              al analgesia, a loading dose of opiate (e.g., hydromorphone 0.4–1 mg [thoracic] or 1–1.5
                                              mg [lumbar]) can be administered early in the surgery and at least 1 h before conclusion.
                                              Following intubation, isolate lung with DLT or BB. The chest tube is then removed while
                                              the chest is prepped for the operation. Ventilate only the healthy lung. Because BPF is
                                              an abnormal communication between the bronchial tree and pleural cavity, if no chest
                                              tube is present, conventional intubation with IPPV can produce tension pneumothorax.
                                              Keep unclamped and do not remove a functioning chest tube until the lung is isolated
                                              and ventilation to the diseased lung is stopped. After the chest is opened, there is no
                                              chance of pneumothorax, but the large air leak through BPF may prevent satisfactory
                                              ventilation of that lung. High-frequency ventilation (HFV) is recommended by some,
                                              but studies show no benefit; in some patients the BPF is actually increased with HFV.
                                              See OLV Management under Anesthetic Considerations for Lobectomy, Pneumonec-
                                              tomy, p. 288.

                    Emergence                 Before closing the chest, lungs are inflated gradually to 30 cmH2O pressure to rein-
                                              flate atelectatic areas and to check for significant air leaks. The surgeon will insert chest
                                              tubes to drain pleural cavity and aid lung reexpansion. Patient is extubated while still
                                              in OR. If postop ventilation is required (rare), the DLT is exchanged for an ETT. If BPF
                                              is still open, consider selective ventilation postop through DLT. It may be necessary to
                                              ventilate each lung separately; use smaller TVs to lung with BPF. Alternatively, pressure-
                                              controlled ventilation may be used to avoid major air leaks through BPF.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 16–18 ga × 1                           An overhydrated patient is at increased risk
                       requirements           Avoid hypervolemia.                        of right-heart failure and pulmonary edema.
                                                                                        Replace blood loss with crystalloid (1:3) or col-
                                                                                         loid (1:1). Third-space losses are negligible and
                                                                                         do not need to be replaced.
                                              Use vasopressor (ephedrine                 Use of epidural local anesthetics can cause
                                                5–10 mg iv bolus or phenyleph-           ↓ BP in a volume-restricted patient; vasopressor
                                                rine 50–100 mcg iv bolus) if             often needed.
                                                hypotensive.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                              ± CVP and/or PA line
                                              ± Arterial line

                    Positioning               Axillary roll, “airplane” for upper arm   Placing the oximeter probe on the down side
                                              Avoid hyperextending arms                 may help detect inadequate perfusion from
                                              3 and pad pressure points                 compression.
                                              3 eyes, ears, genitals

===== PAGE 304 =====
304   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications                   Tension pneumothorax                        Functioning chest tube necessary to prevent ten-
                                                                 Aspiration pneumonia (“down” lung)          sion pneumothorax.

                                 Pain management                 Analgesic requirements minimal              See Pain Management under Anesthetic Con-
                                                                 Parenteral opioids (iv, im, PCA             siderations for Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy,
                                                                 [p. C-3]), epidural, NSAID                  p. 289.

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Alifano M, Gaucher S, Rabbat A, et al: Alternatives to resectional surgery for infectious disease of the lung: from embolization
                                      to thoracoplasty. Thorac Surg Clin 2012; 22(3):413–29.
                                   2. Shiraishi Y: Surgical treatment of chronic empyema. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2010; 58(7):311–6.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 TRACHEAL RESECTION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: The primary indications for tracheal resection are benign stricture and primary tracheal neoplasm.
                                 Benign strictures often are related to previous intubation or tracheostomy, whereas the most common malignant
                                 tumors include squamous cell carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma. Proximal tracheal resections may also be
                                 required for trauma or idiopathic laryngotracheal stenosis. The preoperative assessment of patients with tracheal dis-
                                 ease generally involves imaging with either CT or MRI. Important considerations include the length and position of
                                 the lesion and the caliber of the airway. Although up to 50% of the trachea can be resected with a successful primary
                                 anastomosis, shorter segment resections are technically simpler and do not require special techniques to maximize
                                 tracheal mobility.
                                 Lesions of the upper and midtrachea can be approached through the neck, whereas lesions of the lower trachea
                                 and carina must be approached through the right chest. When using the cervical approach, the patient is
                                 p ositioned with the neck extended. A transverse collar incision is used and subplatysmal planes are developed.
                                  The trachea is then extensively mobilized anteriorly and posteriorly. To minimize the risk of devascularizing
                                  the trachea, only the region to be removed should be circumferentially dissected. During this portion of the
                                  operation, care is taken to avoid injury of the recurrent laryngeal nerves. The trachea is then opened, the oral
                                  ETT is withdrawn into the proximal trachea, and a sterile armored ETT is passed across the operative field.
                                  Fine, interrupted, absorbable sutures are placed, but not tied. Once all sutures are in place, the armored tube is
                                  removed and the oral ETT is positioned across the anastomosis. The ends of the trachea are approximated with
                                  minimal tension and the sutures are tied (Fig. 5-10). To provide minimal tension, it may be necessary to flex the
                                  neck for this portion of the procedure. A suture may be placed from the chin to the chest wall to maintain neck
                                  flexion for several days postop. At the end of the procedure, the patient should be extubated to minimize airway
                                  irritation and disruption of the anastomosis.
                                 Lesions of the lower trachea must be approached through the right chest, where the same techniques as discussed
                                 above are used. To facilitate exposure of the distal trachea, OLV using either a DLT or a single-lumen tube advanced
                                 into the left main bronchus is helpful.
                                 As is apparent from the preceding discussion, all tracheal procedures require cooperation and frequent communica-
                                 tion between the surgeon and anesthesiologist. Occasionally, special techniques, such as jet ventilation or CPB, may
                                 be necessary for tracheal surgery.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Tracheal stenosis or tumor (adenoid cystic carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma most
                                 common)

===== PAGE 305 =====
Tracheal Resection   305

                                   Oral ETT

                                                                Armored ETT

                                                                                                                                                     Thoracic Surgery
                                                Distal trachea                         Oral ETT                    Reconstruction
                                              intubated across                       advanced into                   complete
                                                operative field                      distal trachea

                                Figure 5-10. Stages of tracheal reconstruction. Note ETT in distal trachea.
                                (Reproduced with permission from Grillo HC: Current Problems in Surgery. Year Book
                                Medical Publishers: 1970.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                Cervical Approach                      Sternotomy              Right Thoracotomy

                     Position                   Supine                                 ⇐                       Left lateral decubitus

                     Incision                   Transverse low cervical                Cervical + sternotomy   Right thoracotomy

                     Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g                          ⇐                       ⇐

                     Surgical time              3h                                     3–4 h                   4h

                     Closing                    Neck flexion (chin stitch)             ⇐                       ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                        200 mL                                 350 mL                  350–500 mL

                     Postop care                ICU                                    ⇐                       ⇐

                     Mortality                  < 5%                                   5%                      ⇐

                     Morbidity                  Retained secretions                    ⇐                       ⇐
                                                Dehiscence
                                                Recurrent stenosis
                                                Recurrent/superior laryngeal nerve
                                                  injury
                                                Granuloma

                     Pain score                 3–4                                    5–6                     7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                    Age range                   Wide variation

                    Male:Female                 1:1

                    Incidence                   Rare

===== PAGE 306 =====
306   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                 Etiology                Stenosis usually 2° to intubation or injury; tumor, either primary (e.g., smoking) or secondary
                                                         (e.g., esophageal, lung, thyroid cancer)

                                 Associated              Carcinoid syndrome; cardiopulmonary disease; tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
                                   conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                                 Respiratory              Initial presentation may involve Sx of airway obstruction (stridor, cough, dyspnea),
                                                          which may be misdiagnosed as asthma or pneumonitis. Patients presenting for tracheal
                                                          resection almost exclusively have fixed obstruction, but may have an associated dynamic
                                                          component. A careful preop evaluation of the airway usually includes bronchoscopic
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                          delineation of lesion site and size. This, in combination with a review of CT images, will
                                                          help to determine a plan including type of induction, size of ETT and location of ETT tip.
                                                          Tests: PFT with flow/volume loops; bronchoscopy; CT scan to determine extent of tra-
                                                          cheal obstruction

                                 Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication            Patients with stridor or critical airway lesions should not receive preop sedation. It is prob-
                                                          ably best to avoid sedation in all patients. Patients may be unable to lie flat 2° respiratory
                                                          distress. Low-density helium-oxygen mixtures (Heliox) have the clinical advantage of
                                                          reducing airway resistance to flow past the obstruction, which may be beneficial in opti-
                                                          mizing the patient prior to the procedure.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA, combined with epidural or paravertebral catheter if sternotomy or thoracotomy
                                 approach is used. Surgery is divided into five phases: induction, dissection, open trachea, closure, and emergence.
                                 Induction, open trachea, and emergence are the critical and potentially dangerous stages. Close communication
                                 between surgeon and anesthesiologist is required.

                                 Induction                Be prepared for airway emergency. Surgeon must be present and prepared for emergency rigid
                                                          bronchoscopy and/or to perform tracheostomy below lesion. Induction depends on the site
                                                          and degree of airway narrowing. Proximal or narrow lesions usually require inhalation induc-
                                                          tion or awake FOI, whereas distal or mild lesions may be approached with a rapid sequence
                                                          iv induction. Sevoflurane/O2 is preferred for smooth inhalation induction with depression of
                                                          cough reflex; avoid N2O. High concentrations of sevoflurane may be necessary. Heliox (79%
                                                          helium in oxygen) has been recommended to decrease resistance to flow past the obstruction;
                                                          however, helium is not widely available and limits the FiO2 that can be administered.
                                                          Have a variety of laryngeal blades and uncut ETTs of various sizes, including small 5-mm
                                                          tubes available. If ETT passes beyond lesion, can begin IPPV. If ETT cannot be passed,
                                                          spontaneous ventilation with 100% O2 and sevoflurane will be required if there is a dynamic
                                                          obstruction, while patients with fixed lesions will tolerate PPV through a proximal tube.
                                                           Careful and gradual dilation of the stenotic lesion may be required, using different sizes of
                                                           ETTs or rigid bronchoscopy to facilitate placement of an adequate size ETT for ventilation.
                                                           For carinal resections, use a sterile ETT, which can be placed by surgeon directly into each
                                                           bronchus during resection for cross-field ventilation. An armored tube is preferable because
                                                           it avoids kinking during repeated manipulations by the surgeon. Another option is to place
                                                           jet ventilation catheters into the mainstem bronchi and jet-ventilate the patient during the
                                                           open trachea stage.

===== PAGE 307 =====
Tracheal Resection        307

                    Maintenance       Inhalational anesthesia can be unreliable (and may pollute the OR environment) due to fre-
                                      quent tube changes and intermittent apnea. TIVA is preferable: use propofol (25–100 mcg/kg/
                                      min) and remifentanil (0.05–0.2 mcg/kg/min) infusions. After the airway is secured, muscle
                                      relaxation should be given to avoid movement or coughing during the procedure. Standard
                                      maintenance (p. B-3). FiO2 = 1.0 if using apneic oxygenation; continuous monitoring with pulse
                                      oximetry mandatory. Consider HFJV through a small-diameter catheter if ETT interferes with
                                      operation. HFJV will require iv anesthesia because inhalational agents cannot be delivered pre-
                                      dictably; CPB can be used (rare). Analgesia requirements are highly dependent on surgical ap-
                                      proach. Standard parenteral opioids are sufficient for the cervical approach, whereas epidural
                                      or paravertebral analgesia (similar to lobectomy) are used for open intrathoracic procedures.

                    Emergence         Early extubation; presence of ETT and IPPV can disrupt fresh suture line. Remove ETT as soon
                                      as patient is awake enough to protect airway and breathing spontaneously, but before bucking
                                      and coughing occur. Presence of a “guardian suture” (chestwall to chin) will make reintubation
                                      more difficult. Assess integrity of recurrent laryngeal nerve after high tracheal resections.

                    Blood and fluid   IV: 16–18 ga × 1 (left arm)             3 innominate artery compression, affects right arm

                                                                                                                                                 Thoracic Surgery
                       requirements   NS/LR @ 3 mL/kg/h                       perfusion.

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Left radial artery cannulation permits uninter-
                                      ± Arterial line                         rupted monitoring of BP during periods of innom-
                                                                              inate artery compression. Placement of iv in left
                                                                              arm allows unimpeded infusion. Right-extremity
                                                                              pulse oximetry will help detect innominate artery
                                                                              occlusion (which otherwise could lead to stroke.)

                    Positioning       3 and pad pressure points
                                      3 eyes

                    Airway            ETT replaced with sterile ETT and       Ater the trachea is divided, the surgeon places a
                       management     circuit intraop.                        sterile ETT in the distal trachea. The original ETT
                                                                              is withdrawn above the surgical site. The surgeon
                                                                              attaches a sterile anesthesia circuit to distal ETT
                                                                              for ventilation. Then, the surgeon places a suture
                                                                              through the distal tip of the original ETT. Before
                                                                              reanastomosis of trachea, the distal trachea is suc-
                                                                              tioned to remove accumulated blood and secretions.
                                                                              After a posterior suture line is completed, the origi-
                                                                              nal ETT is pulled through the trachea, and the dis-
                                                                              tal tube (which is below the resection) is removed.
                                                                              Reattach and ventilate patient through original ETT.

                    Complications     Tracheal edema                          Corticosteroids (dexamethasone 6–8 mg iv) to ↓
                                                                              tracheal edema.
                                      Injury to neck                          Any structure in the neck can be damaged, includ-
                                                                              ing superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves, tra-
                                                                              chea, and thoracic duct.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications     Tracheal disruption                     Neck swelling, subcutaneous emphysema, and
                                                                              inability to ventilate indicate loss of airtight anasto-
                                                                               mosis. Immediate reexploration of neck is essential.
                                                                               May be fatal.
                                      Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury         Bilateral (occasionally unilateral) laryngeal nerve
                                                                               damage may → airway obstruction, necessitating
                                                                               reintubation. Mask ventilation may be ineffective.

===== PAGE 308 =====
308   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Position                   Airway edema                               Place patient in head-up, neck-flexed position. Treat
                                                            Keep head flexed to reduce tension         with nebulized racemic epinephrine if airway com-
                                                            on tracheal suture line.                   promise occurs. If reintubation is required, a small
                                                                                                       ETT should be placed under direct vision or fiberop-
                                                                                                       tic guidance, to avoid disruption of the anastomosis.

                                 Pain                       Parenteral opioids (p. C-1)                After patient is fully awake.
                                   management               ± Epidural

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Ashiku SK, Mathisen DJ: Idiopathic laryngotracheal stenosis. Chest Surg Clin North Am 2003; 13(2):257–69.
                                   2. Gaissert HA, Grillo HC, Shadmehr MB, et al: Long-term survival after resection of primary adenoid cystic and squamous cell
                                      carcinoma of the trachea and carina. Ann Thorac Surg 2004; 78(6):1889–96, discussion 1896–7.
                                   3. Hobai IA, Chhangani SV, Alfille PH: Anesthesia for tracheal resection and reconstruction. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30(4):
                                      709–30.
                                   4. McRae K: Anesthesia for airway surgery. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):497–541.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 EXCISION OF MEDIASTINAL TUMOR
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Mediastinal tumors are characterized by their location (anterior, middle, and posterior) and their size.
                                 Common anterior mediastinal tumors include thymic tumors (benign or malignant thymoma and thymic carcinoma),
                                 germ-cell tumors, lymphoma, and substernal goiters. Typically, thymic and germ-cell tumors are resected, whereas
                                 lymphomas are biopsied. Substernal goiters usually can be resected through the neck. Tumors in the anterior medias-
                                 tinum usually are removed through a median sternotomy, whereas tumors in the middle and posterior mediastinum
                                 usually are removed through a lateral thoracotomy or thoracoscopy (VATS). Although middle and posterior medi-
                                 astinal tumors usually do not present airway management problems, the issue of functioning neuroendocrine tissue
                                 must be considered. Mediastinal pheochromocytomas are uncommon middle mediastinal tumors. However, as with
                                 pheochromocytomas arising in other locations, appropriate preop adrenergic management is necessary. Some cysts or
                                 small tumors may be excised using video thoracoscopy (see Video-Assisted Thoracoscopy, p. 326).
                                 Mediastinal tumors that are well encapsulated generally are removed in a straightforward fashion. If anterior mediastinal
                                 tumors are not well encapsulated and are attached to pericardium or lung on either side, appropriate portions of these
                                 attached structures may be removed in continuity with the tumor. If there is attachment to phrenic nerves on either side,
                                 one nerve may be sacrificed, if necessary, to remove the tumor completely. In patients with anterior mediastinal tumors,
                                 invasion of the major vascular structures, particularly the aorta and arch vessels, presents an even greater problem.
                                 Germ-cell tumors of the anterior mediastinum—particularly nonseminomatous tumors—are often treated with
                                 chemotherapy initially. A common regimen for these patients consists of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin, and
                                 because bleomycin is associated with pulmonary toxicity—particularly in conjunction with high concentrations of
                                 inhaled oxygen—care must be taken to keep the FiO2 < 40% when conducting these operations.
                                 Another common issue with patients with large anterior mediastinal masses is that of intrathoracic airway
                                 obstruction at the time of anesthetic induction. Although most mediastinal masses do not cause obstruction of the
                                 trachea or tracheobronchial tree, large mediastinal masses in the anterior mediastinum, in conjunction with mus-
                                 cle relaxation, can lead to complete obstruction of the airway with inability to ventilate the patient. Although rigid
                                 bronchoscopy may permit ventilation through the obstruction, it cannot be counted on to relieve the obstruction;
                                 therefore, only short-acting or no muscle relaxants (spontaneous ventilation) should be used in these patients.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Thymoma; teratodermoid; ganglioneuroma; lymphoma; schwannoma; substernal goiter

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                  Supine or lateral

                                  Incision                  Median sternotomy or lateral thoracotomy

===== PAGE 309 =====
Mediastinoscopy        309

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special                  Sternal or rib retractors
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g

                     Surgical time            ≤2h

                     EBL                      < 500 mL

                     Postop care              Frequently ICU

                     Mortality                Minimal

                     Morbidity                Bleeding

                     Pain score               5–8

                                                                                                                                                            Thoracic Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                All ages

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Etiology                 Anterior mediastinum: Thymoma; teratoma; pericardial cyst; lymphoma; parasternal
                                              (Morgagni) hernia; lipoma
                                              Superior mediastinum: Goiter; aneurysm; parathyroid tumor; esophageal tumor; angiomatous tumor
                                              Middle mediastinum: Lymphoma; lymph node inflammation; bronchogenic tumor; bronchogenic cyst
                                              Posterior mediastinum: Neurogenic tumor; aneurysm (enteric cyst); esophageal tumor; bron-
                                              chogenic tumor

                     Associated               SVC syndrome; myasthenia gravis; recurrent laryngeal nerve damage; airway obstruction; dys-
                       conditions             pnea; Horner’s syndrome

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Mediastinoscopy, p. 312.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. de Wit R: Refining the optimal chemotherapy regimen in good prognosis germ cell cancer: interpretation of the current body
                        of knowledge. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25(28):4346–9.
                     2. Narang S, Harte HB, Body SC: Anesthesia for patients with a mediastinal mass. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):
                        559–79.
                     3. Viswabathans S, Campbell CE, Cork RC: Asymptomatic undetected mediastinal mass: a death during ambulatory anesthesia.
                        J Clin Anesth 1995; 7(2):151–5.

                   MEDIASTINOSCOPY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Mediastinoscopy is used for biopsy of mediastinal lymph nodes. The most common indication for
                   this procedure is bronchogenic carcinoma, although lymphadenopathy associated with lymphoma, sarcoidosis, and
                   infectious granulomatous diseases are also indications for mediastinoscopy. Cervical mediastinoscopy provides
                   access to the pretracheal, paratracheal, and anterior subcarinal nodes (Fig. 5-11), whereas transthoracic medias-
                   tinoscopy (also known as anterior mediastinotomy or Chamberlain’s procedure) provides access to the aorto-
                   pulmonary lymph nodes. Previous mediastinoscopy and radiation are relative contraindications to this procedure.
                   If a thoracic aneurysm is present or SVC is obstructed, mediastinoscopy is contraindicated because the anatomy is
                   distorted and vessels can be punctured inadvertently by the mediastinoscope.

===== PAGE 310 =====
Thoracic Surgery   310   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                             Figure 5-11. Mediastinoscope is inserted through a small cervical incision into the middle
                                             mediastinum, along the pretracheal plane. (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ,
                                             Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                 Variant procedure or approaches: For nodes on the left side of the mediastinum, transthoracic mediasti-
                                 noscopy is performed through a limited anterior thoracotomy. In the classic Chamberlain’s procedure, the 3rd
                                 costal cartilage is resected and the mediastinum is explored without entering the pleural space. As with cervical
                                 mediastinoscopy, visualization is often limited and lymph nodes should be aspirated before biopsy. If the pleural
                                 space is entered during the course of the procedure, either a chest tube can be placed postop or the pleural space can
                                 be aspirated immediately before wound closure. Patients should be extubated at the end of the operation. Cervical
                                 mediastinoscopy is usually an outpatient procedure, whereas patients undergoing transthoracic mediastinoscopy are
                                 usually hospitalized overnight.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of the lung with enlarged mediastinal nodes; mediastinal node enlargement 2°
                                 lymphoma, thymoma, or other

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                Supine

                                  Incision                For mediastinoscopy, suprasternal; usually left 2nd interspace for anterior mediastinotomy.

                                  Special                 Mediastinoscope
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g

                                  Surgical time           ≤1h

                                  EBL                     Minimal (but risk of significant blood loss if major vascular injury occurs).

                                  Postop care             PACU → room

                                  Mortality               < 0.1%

                                  Morbidity               Bleeding
                                                          Pneumothorax: Rare
                                                          Vocal cord paralysis: Rare
                                                          Esophageal perforation: Rare
                                                          Pleural tear: Rare
                                                          Tracheal laceration: Rare

                                  Pain score              2 (mediastinoscopy); 2–3 (anterior mediastinotomy)

===== PAGE 311 =====
Mediastinoscopy   311

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Adults, usually > 50 yr

                     Male:Female             Male > female

                     Incidence               Frequently part of evaluation for patients with lung cancer.

                     Etiology                Lung cancer; lymphoma; thymoma; retrosternal goiter

                     Associated              Airway obstruction
                       conditions

                                                                                                                                          Thoracic Surgery

                                Figure 5-12. Lymph node sites accessible to mediastinoscope biopsy. Many of these
                                can be reached by standard cervical mediastinoscopy. Anterior and aortopulmonary
                                window nodes, however, require extended or anterior mediastinoscopy, VATS, or
                                needle biopsy. (Reproduced with permission from Bocage J-P, Mackenzie JW, Nosher
                                JL: Invasive diagnostic procedures. In: Shields TW, LoCicero J III, Ponn RB, eds. General
                                Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2000.)

===== PAGE 312 =====
312   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                                 (Procedures covered: excision of mediastinal tumor; mediastinoscopy)
                                 Typically, these patients can be divided into two populations, depending on the presence or absence of a significant
                                 mediastinal mass (with the potential for catastrophic airway obstruction or cardiovascular collapse on induction of
                                 anesthesia). The preop assessment must focus on the differentiation of these two populations. Close consultation
                                 with the surgeon is essential in formulating the anesthetic plan. On occasion, patients with critical airway or cardiac
                                 compression may require a tissue biopsy for diagnostic purposes only. If general anesthesia poses a significant physi-
                                 ologic threat to the patient, search for an alternative, less-invasive biopsy site.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                        Mediastinoscope
                                                                                                                   Left recurrent
                                                                                                                   laryngeal
                                                                                                                   nerve
                                                          Right common
                                                           carotid artery
                                                                                                                   Esophagus
                                                        Right subclavian
                                                                  artery
                                                                                                                   Trachea

                                                              Innominate
                                                         artery (pinched)                                          Left subclavian
                                                                                                                   artery
                                                                                                                   Left common
                                                                                                                   carotid artery
                                                      Anterior and lateral
                                                             paratracheal
                                                      and paramainstem
                                                         bronchial nodes

                                                      Anterior subcarinal
                                                            lymph nodes
                                                                Superior
                                                               vena cava

                                           Figure 5-13. Relationship of mediastinoscope to trachea and great vessels.
                                           (Reproduced with permission from Petty C: Right radial artery pressure during
                                           mediastinoscopy. Anesth Analg 1979; 58:428. Modified in Rogers MC: Principles &
                                           Practices of Anesthesiology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis: 1993.)

===== PAGE 313 =====
Mediastinoscopy   313

                    Respiratory                Question patient with anterior mediastinal mass about ability to lie supine and the pres-
                                               ence of cough or dyspnea. Change in position may cause superior vena caval obstruction or
                                               cardiac and airway compression by mediastinal mass (which may be apparent only following
                                               induction or on emergence from anesthesia). On PE, 3 for the presence of cyanosis, wheez-
                                               ing, or stridor in the upright and supine positions. If significant airway compression or SVC
                                               obstruction is present, the surgeon may delay surgery for radiation or chemotherapy. Patients
                                               with SVC syndrome (edema; venous engorgement of head, neck, and upper body; supine
                                               dyspnea; ± headache; mental status change) may have significant airway edema.
                                               Tests: Classic teaching has recommended PFTs with flow volume loops in upright and
                                               supine positions (Fig. 5-14 shows flow volume loop) in patients with suspected central air-
                                                way obstruction. These investigations demonstrate airflow obstruction during inspiration
                                                in patients with an extrathoracic mass and during expiration in patients with an intratho-
                                                racic mass. CT scans obtained with the patient supine delineate the location and extent
                                                of both airway and cardiac ± vascular compression. These images may predict patients at
                                                higher risk (> 50% tracheal compression).

                                                                                                                                                         Thoracic Surgery
                    Cardiovascular             Intrathoracic vascular structures (e.g., right heart, PA, SVC) may be compressed → ↓ BP,
                                               hypoxia, SVC syndrome. Involvement of the pericardium may → tamponade.
                                               Tests: ECHO, CT/MRI if indicated by H&P

                    Musculoskeletal            Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome with resistance
                                               to depolarizing agents and ↑ sensitivity to NDMRs. Monitor relaxation with peripheral
                                               nerve stimulator.

                    Neurologic                 Patient may have ↑ ICP if SVC is obstructed. Consider neurology consultation. Patients
                                               with preexisting carotid disease are at risk for stroke if there is significant compression of
                                               the innominate artery during the procedure.

                    Endocrine                  Due to the diverse causes of an anterior mediastinal mass, consider comorbid thyroid dis-
                                               ease and paraneoplastic syndromes.

                    Laboratory                 Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication              Avoid sedation in patients with the potential for airway obstruction; otherwise, midazolam
                                               1–2 mg iv may be appropriate. Antisialogogue may facilitate awake intubation. In patients
                                               with critical airway obstruction, heliox may prove useful.

                                        Exp                                         Exp
                                        flow                      TLC      RV       flow                      TLC      RV
                                               0                                           0 TLC     RV
                                        Insp       TLC   RV                         Insp
                                        flow                                        flow

                                               Variable intrathoracic obstruction          Variable extrathoracic obstruction

                               Figure 5-14. Flow volume loop: with variable extrathoracic lesion, the alteration in the
                               flow volume loop is seen by flow limitation and a plateau on inspiration. The reverse
                               occurs with variable intrathoracic lesions. (Reproduced with permission from Acres J,
                               Kryger MH: Clinical significance of pulmonary function tests. Chest 1981; 80:207–11.)

===== PAGE 314 =====
314   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA, combined with epidural if thoracotomy is planned

                                 Induction                Consider awake FOI (e.g., if symptomatic in supine position). Alternatively, a mask
                                                          induction with sevoflurane/O2 in a spontaneously breathing patient may be safe. Use of
                                                           neuromuscular blockers in high-risk patients may precipitate airway obstruction and CV
                                                           collapse. Select a reinforced endotracheal tube when intubating patients with airway com-
                                                           pression. Complete or partial airway obstruction by anterior mediastinal mass can also be
                                                           due to changes in lung and chest-wall mechanics associated with changes in the patient’s
                                                           position (sitting to supine during procedure) or to muscle relaxation. Consider placing
                                                           the patient in the lateral or prone position in the event of central airway compression. A
                                                           surgeon familiar with rigid bronchoscopy must be in the OR ready to bypass any obstruc-
                                                           tion. In rare instances, percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) may be necessary to
                                                           complete the procedure safely. If this is indicated, it must be employed electively, not as a
                                                           rescue measure. Salvage or emergent use of CPB in these patients is rarely successful.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Maintenance              O2 (100%) and isoflurane (1–1.5%) or sevoflurane (1.5–2.5%). Avoid N2O, especially during
                                                          OLV. Short-acting muscle relaxant and opioid as indicated.

                                 Emergence                Extubation in OR

                                 Blood and fluid          IV: 14–16 ga × 1                        Have blood for transfusion available in OR prior
                                    requirements          NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                     to surgery. Patients with SVC syndrome may have
                                                                                                  
                                                          Blood in OR                             impaired venous return from upper-limb ivs. In
                                                                                                  these patients a large-bore iv cannula should be
                                                                                                  placed in lower limb for fluid and blood transfusions.

                                 Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Invasive monitors are appropriate in patients with
                                                          ± Arterial line                         large mediastinal masses. In the presence of SVC
                                                          ± CVP/PA                                syndrome, CVP/PA catheters should be placed,
                                                                                                  using the femoral vein. BP cuff on left arm; radial
                                                                                                  artery line (if used) and pulse oximeter on right.
                                                                                                  Mass or mediastinoscope can compress innomi-
                                                                                                  nate artery, causing reduction in right-radial pulse
                                                                                                  and right-arm BP. If only right-arm BP is measured,
                                                                                                  patients may be treated inappropriately for “hypo-
                                                                                                  tension” or cardiac arrest. Suspect great vessel com-
                                                                                                  pression if right-arm pressure is lower than left or
                                                                                                  if right-arm BP disappears in the presence of a nor-
                                                                                                  mal ECG. Arterial compression can compromise
                                                                                                  cerebrovascular perfusion → cerebral ischemia →
                                                                                                  stroke.

                                 Positioning              Head-up position                        In patients with an anterior mediastinal mass, the
                                                          3 and pad pressure points               head-up position reduces mass compression effect
                                                          3 eyes                                  on airway and vascular structures, but may sub-
                                                                                                  ject the patient to ↑ risk of VAE if venous bleed-
                                                                                                  ing occurs during the procedure. Patients with SVC
                                                                                                  obstruction, if placed in head-down position with
                                                                                                  IPPV (further impedes venous return of thoracic
                                                                                                  cavity), are at ↑ risk of airway edema and airway
                                                                                                  obstruction following extubation.

                                 Complications            Bleeding                                Surgical tamponade through mediastinoscope may
                                                                                                  be indicated. For major hemorrhage, emergency
                                                                                                  thoracotomy or median sternotomy may be r equired
                                                                                                  to stop bleeding. Can occur from laceration of
                                                                                                  mediastinal vein.

===== PAGE 315 =====
Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration                    315

                    Complications              Air embolism                                Head elevation increases risk of embolism, par-
                       (cont’d)                                                            ticularly if patient breathes spontaneously. Monitor
                                                                                           ETCO2 and ETN2.
                                               Airway rupture or obstruction               Requires immediate thoracotomy.
                                               Tracheal collapse                           Acute obstruction may require rigid bronchoscope
                                                                                           to reopen airway.
                                               Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury            If recurrent laryngeal nerve injury is suspected, the
                                                                                           vocal cords should be examined during spontane-
                                                                                           ous breathing at the time of extubation.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Pneumothorax                                (see Postop Complications for Cervical Neurosurgi-
                                                                                           cal Procedures, p. 113).
                                               Phrenic/recurrent laryngeal nerve           Bilateral laryngeal nerve damage may result in air-

                                                                                                                                                                Thoracic Surgery
                                                 damage                                    way obstruction, necessitating reintubation. Mask
                                                                                           ventilation may be ineffective.
                                               Tracheomalacia                              May occur in patients with longstanding mediasti-
                                               Bleeding                                    nal mass (e.g., retrosternal goiter)

                    Pain                       Parenteral opioids (p. C-1)
                      management               ± Epidural

                    Tests                      CXR on all patients             to   r/o    See Postop Complications for VATS, p. 329.
                                               pneumothorax.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Barash PG, Tsai B, Kitahata LM: Acute tracheal collapse following mediastinoscopy. Anesthesiology 1976; 44(1):67–8.
                     2. Bechard P, Letourneau L, Lacasse Y, et al: Perioperative cardiorespiratory complications in adults with mediastinal mass.
                        Anesthesiology 2004; 100(4):826–34.
                     3. Campos JH: An update on robotic thoracic surgery and anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 23(1):1–6.
                     4. Erdös G, Tzanova I: Perioperative anaesthetic management of mediastinal mass in adults. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2009; 26(8):627–32.
                     5. Gothard JW: Anesthetic considerations for patients with anterior mediastinal masses. Anesthesiol Clin 2008; 26(2):305–14, vi.
                     6. Hnatiuk OW, Corcoran PC, Sierra A: Spirometry in surgery for mediastinal masses. Chest 2001; 120(4):1152–6.
                     7. Narang S, Harte BH, Body S: Anesthesia for patients with mediastinal mass. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):559–79.
                     8. Petty C: Right radial artery pressure during mediastinoscopy. Anesth Analg 1979; 58(5):428–30.
                     9. Slinger P, Karsli C: Management of the patient with a large mediastinal mass: recurring myths. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007;
                        20(1):1–3.

                   ENDOBRONCHIAL ULTRASOUND-GUIDED
                   TRANSBRONCHIAL NEEDLE ASPIRATION
                   Robert E. Merritt, MD and Vivek Kulkarni, MD

                         Surgical Considerations
                   Description: Endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) has been introduced as a less-
                   invasive alternative to mediastinoscopy for pathologically staging the mediastinal lymph nodes. The procedure has
                   been performed by both pulmonologists and thoracic surgeons. This technique has become widely adopted and will
                   likely play an increasingly important role in cancer staging.
                   The EBUS bronchoscope (Olympus America Inc., Center Valley, PA) contains a curvilinear ultrasound probe, at the
                   distal end of the bronchoscope, which provides a linear continuous B-mode ultrasound image and color D               oppler
                   capability to allow identification of vascular structures. There is a 30-degree fiberoptic lens and biopsy channel through
                    which a 22-gauge biopsy needle (NA-202C Olympus) can be deployed. A latex balloon is placed over the ultrasound

===== PAGE 8 =====
316   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 probe and inflated with saline to provide a fluid interface between airway and probe that improves ultrasonic image
                                 transmitted. EBUS-TBNA can be performed under GA or MAC. The use of an LMA permits evaluation of the upper
                                 paratracheal lymph nodes that may not be accessible when a standard ETT is placed. The mediastinal lymph node
                                 stations (see Fig. 5-15) that are accessible by EBUS-TNBA include 2R, 2L, 4R, 4L, 7, 10R, 10L, 11R and 11L. With
                                 standard cervical mediastinoscopy, the 11R and 11L lymph node stations cannot be assessed for biopsy, although it is
                                 highly unusual that involvement at these stations would impact treatment decisions.
                                 At the beginning of the procedure, the EBUS bronchoscope is advanced into airway, and the ultrasound probe is used
                                 to scan the mediastinal lymph node stations of interest. Significant vascular structures, such as the pulmonary artery
                                 and aorta, appear hyperechoic and can be further identified with color Doppler. Once the lymph node is visualized,
                                 the 22-guage biopsy needle is placed into the lymph node under direct ultrasound guidance. A suction syringe is
                                 applied to the biopsy needle, and the needle is passed into the lymph node for approximately 10 passes under ultra-
                                 sound guidance. The aspirate is then placed on a slide with the assistance of a cytopathologist.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                                                        1
                                                                               1
                                                                                                         1            1

                                                                                        1
                                                                                                     1

                                                                                   2R
                                                                                                                 2L

                                                                                   2R

                                                                                        4R
                                                                                                         2L

                                                                                                         4L
                                                                                             4R
                                                                                                                                  6

                                                                                        4R
                                                                                                             4L
                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                     7
                                                                    11–14

                                                                                             7               7                11–14

                                                                                                             8

                                                                               9                                          9

                                                                                                 8

                                                     Figure 5-15. Regional lymph node stations for lung cancer staging.

===== PAGE 317 =====
Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration                   317

                   The onsite cytology in the OR is essential to confirm adequacy of diagnostic material and for preliminary diagnosis.
                   The observation of moderate to abundant numbers of lymphocytes or pigmented histiocytes may serve as an indica-
                   tor of adequate sampling of lymph nodes that are free of metastatic carcinoma. A cytopathologist should be in the
                   operating room during EBUS-TBNA cases to ensure adequacy of sampling, that the specimen preparation is optimal,
                   and to provide preliminary diagnoses.
                   Usual preoperative diagnosis: Carcinoma of the lung; sarcoidosis; lymphoma

                     ■■ Summary of Procedure
                    Position                                                        Supine
                    Incision                                                        None
                    Special instrumentation                                         Fiberoptic EBUS bronchoscope
                    Antibiotics                                                     None
                    Surgical time                                                   <1h
                    EBL                                                             Minimal

                                                                                                                                                              Thoracic Surgery
                    Postop care                                                     PACU → Home
                    Mortality                                                       < 0.1%
                    Morbidity                                                       Pneumothorax: Rare
                                                                                    Airway bleeding: Rare
                    Pain score                                                      0–1

                     ■■ Patient Population Characteristics
                    Age range                                                       Adults
                    Male:Female                                                     Male > Female
                    Incidence                                                       Frequently part of lung cancer evaluation
                    Etiology                                                        Lung cancer; lymphoma; sarcoidosis
                    Associated conditions                                           Lymphadenopathy; mediastinal mass

                   Selected Readings
                     1. Adams K, Shah L, Edmonds L, et al: Test performance of endobronchial ultrasound and transbronchial needle aspiration
                        biopsy for mediastinal staging in patients with lung cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. Thorax 2009; 64(9):757–62.
                     2. Alsharif M, Andrade RS, Groth SS, et al: Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial fine-needle aspiration. Am J Clin
                        Pathol 2008; 130(3):434–43.
                     3. Ernst A, Anantham D, Eberhardt R, et al: Diagnosis of mediastinal adenopathy-real-time endobronchial ultrasound guided
                        needle aspiration versus mediastinoscopy. J Thorac Oncol 2008; 3(6):577–82.
                     4. Gomez M, Silvestri G: Endobronchial ultrasound for the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2009;
                        6(2):180–6.
                     5. Herth F, Annema J, Eberhardt R, et al: Endobronchial ultrasound with transbronchial needle aspiration for restaging the
                        mediastinum in lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26:3346–9.
                     6. Herth F, Eberhardt R, Krasnik M, et al: Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration of lymph nodes
                        in the radiologically and positron emission tomography-normal mediastinum in patients with lung cancer. Chest 2008;
                        133(4):887–91.
                     7. Sarkiss M, Kennedy M, Riedel B, et al: Anesthesia technique for endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of
                        mediastinal lymph node. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 21(6):892–6.

                          ANESTHETIC Considerations
                   EBUS-TBNA is a procedure performed for biopsy of mediastinal nodes or mass lesions. The procedure is therefore
                   similar to a mediastinoscopy but is less invasive. Pulmonologists may perform the procedure under sedation and
                   local anesthesia, whereas thoracic surgeons often perform the procedure under GA to ensure patient immobility,
                   which may be safer when sampling nodes close to vascular structures. Occasionally the procedure may be unsuccess-
                   ful requiring conversion to a mediastinoscopy.

===== PAGE 318 =====
318   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      Preoperative
                                 The preop considerations for EBUS-TBNA are similar to those for bronchoscopy and mediastinoscopy (see p. 321).
                                 If the mediastinal mass to be biopsied is compressing the airway or a vascular structure, proceed with caution as
                                 described under excision of anterior mediastinal tumor (see p. 308).

                                  Respiratory              H&P complemented by lab and radiologic studies to focus on the underlying disease,
                                                           evaluating for pulmonary problems. Consider PFTs with flow-volume loops for lesions
                                                           that may be compressing the airways. When respiratory distress is present at rest or when
                                                           exercise tolerance is poor an ABG may be indicated to assess increased pulmonary risk
                                                           (PaO2 < 70 and PCO2 > 45).
                                  Cardiovascular           Many patients with tumor may have concomitant cardiac disease, which may need car-
                                                           diac consultation to optimize cardiovascular status. Tests: ECG and stress-echo may be
                                                           indicated.
                                  Musculoskeletal          Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic syndrome with sensitivity to nondepo-
                                                           larizing relaxants and resistance to depolarizing relaxants. Monitoring neuromuscular
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                           blockade during the procedure is essential.
                                  Hematologic              Adequacy of oxygen-carrying capacity (Hb/Hct) is important to ascertain. A type and
                                                           screen may be indicated when the node or mass to be biopsied is abutting a vascular
                                                           structure (check with surgeon). Tests: Hct
                                  Laboratory               Hb/Hct for oxygen-carrying capacity and BMP to ascertain that the K+ and creatinine
                                                           levels are in the normal range for safe use of muscle relaxants.
                                  Premedication            Antisialogogue 1 (e.g., glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg iv) to decrease secretions, and mild sedation
                                                           with midazolam (0.5–2 mg iv) along with a small dose of fentanyl (25–50 mcg) may be
                                                           needed. Avoid respiratory depression and oversedation.

                                      Intraoperative
                                 Anesthetic Technique: Sedation + topical anesthesia: If the procedure is to be done with sedation and topical
                                 anesthesia, the nerve blocks and topical anesthesia techniques are those described under bronchoscopy (see p. 322).
                                  General Anesthesia: This is the common technique requested by thoracic surgeons. For higher nodes a LMA is
                                  preferred, while lower nodes can be accessed via an endotracheal tube.

                                  Induction                Following preoxygenation, a standard induction using propofol (1–2 mg/kg) or
                                                           etomidate (0.3 mg/kg). A depolarizing relaxant (succinylcholine 1 mg/kg iv) or a
                                                           short-acting nondepolarizing relaxant (e.g., rocuronium 0.3–0.6 mg/kg iv) can be
                                                           used. A small dose of fentanyl (1–2 mcg/kg iv) or remifentanil (0.25–1 mcg/kg iv)
                                                           can be used to facilitate intubation. Antibiotic is often not needed because only
                                                           needle punctures are made.
                                  Intubation               Higher nodes are often easier to access with a LMA (size #3 or larger), whereas lower
                                                           nodes can be adequately accessed through an endotracheal tube. The ETT needs to be
                                                           large enough to enable manipulation of the bronchoscope without damaging the balloon
                                                           that surrounds the ultrasound probe. An 8.5-mm ID for women and 9.0-mm ID for men
                                                           facilitates the procedure. The LMA or ETT is linked to the anesthesia circuit through
                                                           an angled bronchoscopy adaptor. The seal on the adaptor is often slit to allow easier
                                                           to-and-fro passage of the bronchoscope → significant leak.
                                  Maintenance              Because of the significant leak at the adaptor, TIVA (see p. C-2) is a good choice for
                                                           anesthetic maintenance. Because of the significant leak, ventilation is performed with
                                                            higher fresh gas flows either manually to overcome the leak and changing compliance or
                                                            in a pressure controlled mode with a FiO2 sufficient to maintain adequate oxygen satura-
                                                            tion. The adequacy of ventilation can only be assessed intermittently using ETCO2 and
                                                            manually closing the leak between biopsy attempts. Local anesthetic is often applied topi-
                                                            cally either prior to intubation or during surgery to decrease postop tracheal irritation
                                                            caused by the procedure.

===== PAGE 319 =====
Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration               319

                    Emergence                 Muscle relaxant is reversed and the patient is extubated sitting upright with remifen-
                                              tanil infusion (0.03–0.05 mcg/kg/min) for a smooth wake-up. Supplemental oxygen
                                              postop.
                    Blood and fluid           IV: 18 ga minimum NS/LR @
                    requirements              2 ml/kg/h
                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1)        Place the EKG electrodes away from the sternum in
                                              ± arterial line                       case an emergency sternotomy is necessary. Place a
                                              Second pulse oximeter                 BP cuff or arterial line (when indicated) on the left
                                                                                    side in the event of a possible mediastinoscopy (with
                                                                                    intermittent pressure on the innominate artery).
                                                                                    Place a pulse oximeter on both sides.
                    Positioning               Supine, arms tucked.                  To facilitate surgery the patient is usually turned
                                              3 and pad pressure points             90 degrees from the anesthesia provider with a jelly
                                                                                    doughnut to stabilize the head.
                    Complications             Hypoxia                               Pulse oximetry monitored continuously. Interrupt

                                                                                                                                                         Thoracic Surgery
                                                                                    the procedure to allow oxygenation to improve before
                                                                                    proceeding.
                                              Hypercapnia                           ETCO2 monitoring is inaccurate because of the leak
                                                                                     at the adaptor. Intermittently pause the procedure
                                                                                     and manually close the leak to confirm that ETCO2
                                                                                    is not too high. Ventilate to normalize the ETCO2
                                                                                    before proceeding.
                                              Hemorrhage                             Often minor and local, which can be controlled with
                                                                                     epinephrine solution irrigation. Rarely major, which
                                                                                     may require an emergency sternotomy or thoracotomy.

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications                            Airway irritation                        Airway irritation causing coughing
                                                                                                      (decreased by lidocaine topical spray
                                                                                                      prior to or during the procedure), or
                                                                                                      bronchospasm, treated with nebu-
                                                                                                      lized bronchodilators, e.g., racemic
                                                                                                      epinephrine or albuterol. Occasion-
                                                                                                      ally steroids may be necessary
                                                             Hypoxia                                  Humidified O2 by mask.
                                                             Hypoventilation                          Avoided by adequate reversal of
                                                                                                      neuromuscular blockade and using
                                                                                                      minimal dose short-acting opioids.
                                                             Hemorrhage                               Usually self-limiting.
                    Pain management                          Usually minimal
                    Tests                                    CXR                                      A postop CXR is often performed to
                                                                                                      confirm absence of pneumothorax
                                                                                                      or mediastinal emphysema.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Lee HJ, Haas AR, Sterman DH, et al: Pilot randomized study comparing two techniques of airway anaesthesia during
                        curvilinear probe endobronchial ultrasound bronchoscopy (CP-EBUS). Respirology 2011; 16:102–6.
                     2. Sarkiss M, Kennedy M, Riedel, et al: Anesthesia technique for endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of
                        mediastinal lymph node. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 21(6):892–96.

===== PAGE 320 =====
320   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 BRONCHOSCOPY—FLEXIBLE AND RIGID
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Bronchoscopy can be performed using either rigid or flexible instrumentation. Flexible fiberoptic
                                 bronchoscopy (FOB) is used for the diagnosis and evaluation of a variety of pulmonary conditions and can be
                                 accomplished using topical anesthesia and sedation without an anesthesiologist. Transbronchial biopsies can be
                                 performed in sedated patients, although more extensive interventions—such as laser ablation of a tumor, stent place-
                                 ment, and balloon dilation—generally require general anesthesia. When performed under general anesthesia, the
                                 bronchoscope should be passed through a size 8 or larger ETT.
                                 Rigid bronchoscopy is more appropriate for evaluating hemoptysis and for intrabronchial procedures such as
                                 mechanical dilation of tracheal or bronchial strictures, laser or mechanical tumor debridement, and removal of
                                  foreign bodies that cannot be extracted with basket forceps through a flexible bronchoscope. Rigid bronchoscopy
                                  is performed under general anesthesia. With the patient’s head and neck extended, the eyes, teeth, and gums must
        Thoracic Surgery

                                  be protected, and the bronchoscope is inserted into the posterior pharynx until the epiglottis is visualized. The
                                  epiglottis is lifted anteriorly, with care being taken not to use the patient’s teeth as a fulcrum. The bronchoscope is
                                  then advanced into the trachea (Fig. 5-16), and the diagnostic or therapeutic procedure is carried out. Ventilation is
                                  through the side-arm of the bronchoscope and, as there is no cuff to prevent escape of anesthetic gases, high venti-
                                  latory volumes may be required. Because interventions (e.g., biopsy or tumor debridement) require removal of the
                                  bronchoscope viewing lens, the anesthesiologist must time ventilation appropriately. A Venturi ventilator may be
                                  useful when the viewing lens must be off for prolonged periods.
                                 Laser bronchoscopy can be performed using either flexible or rigid bronchoscopes. The CO2 laser is character-
                                 ized by limited tissue penetration. As such, it is useful for superficial lesions of the upper airway. The Nd:YAG
                                 lasers use higher energies, can be directed by fiberoptic light guides, and can be used for tumor ablation. As both
                                  of these types of lasers rely on thermal damage to tissues, precautions—particularly FiO2 ≤ 40%—must be taken to
                                  prevent the devastating complication of airway fire. Photodynamic therapy uses visible light to activate a photo-
                                  sensitive compound into a locally toxic drug. Because no thermal energy is involved, airway fires are not an issue.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of the lung, primary or recurrent; hemoptysis; obstruction; foreign body;
                                 benign tumor; respiratory papillomatosis

                                                           Figure 5-16. Patient positioning for rigid bronchoscopy.

===== PAGE 321 =====
Bronchoscopy—Flexible and Rigid       321

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Fiberoptic
                                           Bronchoscopy              Rigid Bronchoscopy                  Laser Bronchoscopy

                     Position              Supine                    ⇐ (see Fig. 5-16)                   ⇐

                     Special               FOB and instruments       Rigid bronchoscope and              Nd:YAG laser and bronchoscope
                       instrumentation                               instruments

                     Unique                None                      Shared airway                       ⇐ + Keep FiO2 ≤ 0.4 during use
                       considerations                                                                    of laser.

                     Antibiotics           Usually none              ± Cefazolin 1 g                     ⇐

                     Surgical time         < 30 min                  ⇐                                   1 hr

                     EBL                   Minimal                   ⇐                                   ⇐

                     Postop care           PACU → room               ⇐                                   ⇐

                                                                                                                                                  Thoracic Surgery
                     Mortality             Minimal                   ⇐                                   5%

                     Morbidity             Barotrauma                ⇐                                   ⇐
                                           Airway obstruction        ⇐                                   Airway fire
                                           Pneumothorax              ⇐                                   Hemorrhage
                                                                     Tooth damage                        Perforation
                                                                     Tracheal laceration
                                                                     Pneumomediastinum
                                                                     Esophageal perforation

                     Pain score            1                         1                                   1

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Usually adults > 50 yr

                     Male:Female           1:1

                     Incidence             Common

                     Etiology              Smoking; hemoptysis; aspiration of foreign body

                     Associated            Lung cancer or metastatic spread to tracheobronchial tree; airway obstruction 2° tumor or FB;
                       conditions          lung infiltrates

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for bronchoscopy range from asymptomatic to those in severe respiratory distress. Fiberoptic
                   bronchoscopy is performed most commonly as it is less invasive, usually easily done under sedation, and allows for
                   more distal airway examination. Rigid bronchoscopy is mostly reserved for specific interventional procedures such
                   as hemorrhage control, foreign body removal, tumor debulking, and stent placement.

                    Respiratory             H&P to focus on underlying condition. Evaluate for acute and chronic pulmonary prob-
                                            lems by H&P and lab and radiologic studies.
                                            Tests: Consider ABG in patient with respiratory distress, SOB at rest, or poor exercise tol-
                                            erance. PaO2 < 70 mm Hg and/or PaCO2 > 45 mm Hg indicate significant respiratory im-
                                            pairment and predict increased risk; PFT with flow-volume loop (for airway lesions); CXR.

===== PAGE 322 =====
322   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Cardiovascular            Many patients have Hx of cardiac disease. Cardiology consultation should be obtained for
                                                           active/unstable cardiac issues or for patient with poorly controlled chronic disease.
                                                           Tests: Consider ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                                 Musculoskeletal           Patients with lung cancer may have myasthenic (Eaton-Lambert) syndrome with resistance
                                                           to depolarizing muscle relaxants and ↑ sensitivity to NDMRs. Monitor relaxation with
                                                           peripheral nerve stimulator.

                                 Hematologic               Type & cross rarely required unless high risk of hemorrhage from biopsy (3 with surgeon).
                                                           Adequate O2-carrying capacity (Hct) important.
                                                           Tests: Hb/Hct

                                 Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication             Antisialagogue (glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg iv, avoids central anticholinergic effects). Light seda-
                                                           tion with midazolam 1–2 mg iv and/or fentanyl, 50–100 mcg iv. Avoid heavy sedation that
                                                           might impair postop ventilation.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Flexible bronchoscopy: Anesthetic technique for flexible FOB requires sedation or GA. Anxious patients and
                                 those with respiratory compromise may not tolerate sedation for awake FOB, and patients with Hx of gastric reflux
                                 or aspiration are not candidates for awake FOB. Local anesthetic toxicity is a distinct possibility; ensure availability
                                 of resuscitative equipment.

                                 Sedation with             Sedate patient as necessary to ensure comfort and cooperation (midazolam 1–2 mg iv
                                   topical                 and/or fentanyl 50–100 mcg iv). Bronchoscopy often better tolerated if using nasal route.
                                   anesthesia              Airway anesthesia can be provided with direct nerve blocks or topical anesthesia.
                                                           Nerve blocks: Transtracheal local anesthesia: Pass needle through cricothyroid mem-
                                                           brane, aspirate air into syringe, and then inject lidocaine (2%) 2 mL. Remove needle quickly
                                                           because injection causes cough (spreads the anesthetic). Perform superior laryngeal nerve
                                                           blocks: Insert needle anterior to superior cornu of thyroid cartilage. After resistance is felt,
                                                           aspirate gently, then inject lidocaine (2%) 2 mL; repeat on other side.
                                                           Topical anesthesia: Spray palate, pharynx, larynx, vocal cords, and trachea with lidocaine
                                                           (4%), using nebulizer, or have patient gargle viscous lidocaine (4%). Hold base of tongue for-
                                                           ward and, using Krause’s forceps, place pledgets soaked in local anesthetic in each pyriform
                                                           fossa to block the internal branch of superior laryngeal nerve. Laryngeal structures are well
                                                           topicalized with having the patient gargle 4% lidocaine. The trachea can be topicalized by
                                                           administering 1% lidocaine through the working channel of the fiberoptic scope. Patient
                                                           can hold a suction catheter in the mouth to remove oral secretions. A special face mask
                                                           (Patil-Syracuse) incorporates a diaphragm through which the FOB can pass while patient
                                                           breathes 100% O2. Use a special oral airway (Ovassapian) to guide FOB over back of tongue
                                                           into trachea to prevent damage to FOB by teeth. Limit amount of suctioning by surgeon
                                                           because suctioning through FOB decreases FiO2 and FRC, → ↓ PaO2.

                                 General anesthesia: Almost any anesthetic technique is acceptable, including use of an LMA. A large ETT has less
                                 resistance to air flow; minimum size is 8 mm (ID) for adult FOB. If patient requires ETT < 8 mm, use a pediatric FOB.
                                 Placing an LMA allows for examination of the proximal airway and a size 2.5 or larger ProSeal LMA has an airway
                                 caliber equivalent to or larger than a size 8.0 ETT. Presence of a FOB in the ETT or LMA increases airway resistance
                                 and may result in intrinsic PEEP and dynamic hyperinflation/ pulmonary tamponade (hypotension).
                                 Rigid bronchoscopy: Requires relatively deep GA and usually paralysis for scope insertion.

                                 Induction                 Preoxygenate well. Standard induction. Consider short-acting paralytics (e.g., succinylcho-
                                                           line 1 mg/kg or rocuronium 0.3–0.6 mg/kg). Use only small amount of iv opioids because
                                                           postop analgesic requirements are minimal; consider remifentanil (1 mcg/kg) to avoid
                                                           postop respiratory depression.

===== PAGE 323 =====
Bronchoscopy—Flexible and Rigid            323

                    Maintenance       Commonly inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane, or sevoflurane and 100% O2. The adequacy
                                      of inhaled agent delivery may be hampered by ongoing suctioning. TIVA is an alternative
                                      (p. C-2): propofol (50–150 mcg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.1–0.3 mcg/kg/min). Paralysis
                                      is usually used for ETT placement and is required during rigid bronchoscopy. May be pro-
                                      vided with short-acting, nondepolarizing agents (atracurium, vecuronium, or rocuronium)
                                      or alternatively a succinylcholine drip (1 g/250 mL NS, t itrated to effect; be aware of onset of
                                      phase II block at doses > 5–6 mg/kg). Manual IPPV through side-arm of rigid bronchoscope.
                                      High flow (up to 20 L/min) to compensate for leak. Hyperventilate patient in preparation for
                                      periods of apnea. Ventilation must be interrupted whenever surgeon removes eyepiece to
                                      suction or biopsy. Manually ventilate to compensate for compliance changes that occur when
                                      bronchoscope is in trachea (ventilating both lungs) and when it is in bronchus (ventilating
                                      one lung). O2 flush is used to compensate for leak; bypasses anesthetic vaporizer. Frequent
                                      flushing lowers anesthetic concentration. Sanders Jet Ventilator using Venturi effect is an
                                      alternative. Allows for uninterrupted ventilation and may shorten the length of the procedure
                                       (fewer interruptions). Requires TIVA (p. C-2). Entrainment of air results in variable FiO2.
                                       Adequacy of ventilation is hard to determine as no EtCO2 monitoring is available; prolonged

                                                                                                                                                  Thoracic Surgery
                                      procedures may require intermittent blood gas analysis or transcutaneous CO2 monitoring.

                    Emergence         Place ETT or LMA at conclusion of rigid bronchoscopy. Patient must be fully awake before
                                      extubation with no residual neuromuscular blockade. Emergence can be “stormy.” Patient may
                                      cough violently to clear secretions and blood. Wake-up from remifentanil infusion tends to be
                                      smoother. Other considerations include early suctioning of the airway, lidocaine (1 mg/kg iv)
                                      to decrease airway reactivity. Provide postop O2 supplementation (preferably humidified).

                    Blood and fluid   Blood usually not required.              Transfusion unnecessary unless complicated by
                       requirements   IV: 18 ga × 1                            massive hemorrhage; may require emergency
                                                                               thoracotomy.
                                      NS/LR @ 2 mL/kg/h                        Usually restrict iv fluids to avoid fluid overload.

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (p. B-1)               *NB: ETCO2 not accurate during rigid bronchosco-
                                                                               py because of dilution effect at sample port.

                    Positioning       3 and pad pressure points
                                      3 eyes
                                      Shoulder roll for rigid bronchoscopy

                    Complications     Hypoxemia                                Monitor pulse oximetry continuously. If patient hy-
                                                                               poxemic, surgeon must withdraw bronchoscope into
                                                                               trachea. If problem persists, remove bronchoscope
                                                                               and ventilate by mask or ETT.
                                      Hypercapnia                              Common, due to hypoventilation. Mild hypercarbia
                                                                               is well tolerated except for the setting of severe pul-
                                                                               monary HTN. CO2 levels above 70 mm Hg may be as-
                                                                               sociated with tachycardia, dysrhythmias, and cardiac
                                                                               depression. Easily treated with higher minute ventila-
                                                                               tion/hyperventilation. IV lidocaine for dysrhythmias.
                                      Bleeding                                 Requires frequent suctioning. For major hemor-
                                      Tracheobronchial injury                  rhage, place uncut ETT down healthy bronchus
                                      Aspiration of debris                     and ventilate good lung. Consider DLT. May require
                                                                               thoracotomy using DLT or BB to isolate and/or tam-
                                                                               ponade bleeding site.
                                      Hypoxemia                                Rx: Supplemental O2. Nebulized racemic epineph-
                                                                               rine and steroids may ↓ airway edema. Humidified
                                                                               O2 may ↓ airway irritation.
                                      Hypoventilation                          Incomplete reversal of muscle relaxants or opioid
                                      Dental damage                            overdosage can cause hypoventilation. Obtain ABG
                                      Airway trauma                            if patient has difficulty breathing or is oversedated.
                                      Pneumothorax                             Be prepared to reintubate patient.

===== PAGE 324 =====
324   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications               Hemorrhage
                                    (cont’d)                 Risk of aspiration                          If nerve blocks used to depress gag reflex, no eating
                                                             Airway obstruction                          or drinking for several hours postbronchoscopy.
                                                             (bronchospasm, bleeding,
                                                             dislodged tumor, FB)

                                 Pain                        Minimal pain; easily treated with iv
                                   management                opioids.

                                 Tests                       CXR                                         Obtain CXR in recovery room to ✓ for atelectasis,
                                                                                                         pneumothorax, mediastinal emphysema.

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Bolliger CT, Sutedja TG, Strausz J, et al: Therapeutic bronchoscopy with immediate effect: laser, electrocautery, argon plasma
        Thoracic Surgery

                                      coagulation and stents. Eur Respir J 2006; 27(6):1258–71.
                                   2. Conacher ID: Anaesthesia and tracheobronchial stenting for central airway obstruction in adults. Br J Anaesth 2003;
                                      90(3):367–74.
                                   3. Conacher ID, Curran E: Local anaesthesia and sedation for rigid bronchoscopy for emergency relief of central airway
                                      obstruction. Anaesthesia 2004; 59(3):290–2.
                                   4. Hobai IA, Chhangani SV, Alfille PH: Anesthesia for tracheal resection and reconstruction. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30(4):709–30.
                                   5. Lohser J, Brodsky JB: Bronchial stenting through a ProSeal laryngeal mask airway. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2006;
                                      20(2):227–8.
                                   6. McRae K: Anesthesia for airway surgery. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):497–541.
                                   7. Moghissi K, Dixon K, Thorpe JA, et al: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) in early central lung cancer: a treatment option for
                                      patients ineligible for surgical resection. Thorax 2007; 62(5):374–5.
                                   8. Wain JC: Rigid bronchoscopy: the value of a venerable procedure. Chest Surg Clin North Am 2001; 11(4):691–9.

                                 AIRWAY LASER SURGERY

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                                 Patients usually present with complications related to long-term smoking and an airway mass (endobronchial, cari-
                                 nal, or tracheal). Resection tends to be a misnomer, as the laser is most commonly used for debulking of an unresect-
                                 able lesion. Central airway obstruction is a primary concern when providing anesthesia.

                                 Respiratory                 It is imperative to define the exact location and magnitude of any central airway obstruc-
                                                             tion. This helps to estimate an appropriate ETT size and quantify the potential for obstruc-
                                                             tion during induction. CXR and CT scan must be studied. PFTs and flow volume loops may
                                                             also characterize the lesion.
                                                             Tests: PFTs; ABGs; CXR; CT scan (to delineate airway anatomy, including site and severity
                                                             of airway lesion)

                                 Musculoskeletal             Although there may be no clinically detectable muscle weakness, some of these patients
                                                             will have Eaton-Lambert syndrome → ↓ sensitivity to NDMRs and ↑ resistance to depolar-
                                                             izing muscle relaxants.

                                 Hematologic                 Transfuse patients with preop Hct < 25% (or < 30%, if CAD present).
                                                             Tests: Hct

                                 Laboratory                  Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication               Minimal; avoid respiratory depressants; consider antisialagogue (e.g., glycopyrrolate).

===== PAGE 325 =====
Airway Laser Surgery        325

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Usually GA. Unexpected patient movement may be disastrous, which is why sedation and
                   local anesthesia are rarely practical. Nd:YAG laser can be transmitted through a flexible quartz monofilament passed
                   through either a rigid bronchoscope or FOB. Rigid bronchoscope provides improved visibility and better debris re-
                   trieval. It also maintains the airway with less chance of fire, although it can reflect the laser beam, causing tissue damage.
                   Manual ventilation through the side-arm may be difficult. FOB is used with local anesthesia or through ETT under GA.
                   Laser-safe ETTs (required for surgery in the proximal trachea) include regular ETTs wrapped in metallic tape or com-
                   mercially available “laser” tubes (usually some combination of aluminum, stainless steel, Teflon, and/or silicon). Fill cuff
                   with saline (+ methylene blue to facilitate leak detection) and avoid any petroleum-based lubricants on ETT. Steps also
                   must be taken to protect the OR staff from laser injury. These include safety glasses to avoid ocular damage and specially
                   designed and properly fitted filter face masks to protect from inhalation of vaporized viral particles. Photodynamic
                   therapy is simpler in its considerations and risks: routine GETA with large ETT, immobile patient, and no risk of fire.

                    Induction                 Without or with distal airway obstruction (past carina): Standard induction (see p. B-2).
                                              With proximal airway obstruction: Awake bronchoscopy may help to determine the fea-

                                                                                                                                                           Thoracic Surgery
                                              sibility of tracheal intubation. Awake fiberoptic intubation is the safest route. In patients
                                              with less severe obstruction, an inhalation induction with spontaneous ventilation may be
                                              appropriate. Avoid muscle relaxants until the airway has been secured. Several special laser
                                              ETTs are available though none guarantee against airway fire. The risk is minimized with
                                              Nd:YAG lasering of central airway lesions as the beam is directed distal to the tip of the ETT.
                                              With rigid bronchoscopy: GA with standard or rapid sequence induction.

                    Maintenance               Use isoflurane/desflurane/sevoflurane, air–O2 mixture. Keep FiO2 < 0.4. Avoid N2O, which
                                              supports combustion. TIVA (p. C-2) with propofol (50–150 mcg/kg/min) and remifentanil
                                              (0.1–0.3 mcg/kg/min) infusion is preferable during rigid bronchoscopy as it avoids anesthetic
                                              contamination of the OR. Frequent suctioning during bronchoscopic examination may make
                                              inhalation techniques unreliable. Short-acting, nondepolarizing relaxant or succinylcho-
                                              line infusion should be used to provide an immobile patient during laser use. If the patient
                                              becomes hypoxemic, ventilate the lungs with higher FiO2 and ask the surgeon to stop.

                    Emergence                 Following rigid bronchoscopy, the patient usually is intubated until awake and breathing
                                              well and protective airway reflexes have returned. Emergence can be “stormy,” with bleed-
                                              ing and secretion clearance a problem. Patient should be recovered in the sitting position.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2           There is a potential for massive blood loss following inadvertent
                       requirements           NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h          perforation of a major blood vessel.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors            Continuous pulse oximetry essential; monitor ETCO2 to assess
                                              (p. B-1).                    adequacy of ventilation (ETCO2 value may be inaccurate, con-
                                                                           sider ABG during long cases). Keep alveolar PO2 < 40%.

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes and laser shields

                    Complications             Airway obstruction    From tumor, blood, tissue debris, etc.
                                              Hypoxemia/hypercarbia From inadequate ventilation.
                                              Bleeding              Can be massive from perforation of blood vessel by laser. Apply
                                                                    topical epinephrine following laser photocoagulation to control
                                                                    bleeding.
                                              Perforation of        May be catastrophic secondary to pneumothorax/ pneumome-
                                              tracheobronchial tree diastinum, cardiac tamponade; lung isolation may be lifesaving.
                                              Airway fire           Rx: stop ventilation, remove O2 source, extubate trachea to de-
                                                                    crease inhalation of toxic products. Douse fire with saline. Suc-
                                                                    tion all debris from airway. Ventilate patient by mask, then rein-
                                                                    tubate. Prior to extubation, perform bronchoscopy to reevaluate
                                                                    airway damage and suction debris. Consider steroids.
                                              Venous air embolism   Rx: Inform surgeon, d/c laser, prevent further entrainment. If
                                                                    access present, attempt to aspirate air. Immediately volume load
                                                                    and support circulation with vasopressors.

===== PAGE 326 =====
326   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications               Airway edema                               Edema formation is difficult to appreciate simply
                                                                                                        based on epithelial changes during bronchoscopy.
                                                                                                        May progress dramatically after the procedure
                                                                                                        resulting in airway obstruction and need for emer-
                                                                                                         gency reintubation. Steroids are routinely given to
                                                                                                         minimize edema formation (dexamethasone 6–8
                                                                                                         mg iv). Nebulized racemic epinephrine is helpful.
                                                                                                         Complications such as hemorrhage or obstruction
                                                                                                         can be delayed up to 48 h.

                                 Pain                        Minimal pain; rarely requires
                                   management                analgesic.

                                 Tests                       Continuous pulse oximetry.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. McRae K: Anesthesia for airway surgery. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):497–541.
                                   2. Ochroch EA: Laser endobronchial treatment does not need to occur in the operating room. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005;
                                      19(1):118–20.
                                   3. Sullivan EA: Anesthetic considerations for special thoracic procedures. Thorac Surg Clin 2005; 15(1):131–42.
                                   4. Vaitkeviciute I, Ehrenwerth J: Bronchial stenting and laser airway surgery should not take place outside the operating room.
                                      J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005; 19(1):121–2.

                                 VIDEO-ASSISTED THORACOSCOPY SURGERY (VATS)
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Video-assisted thoracoscopy surgery (VATS) refers to the extension of laparoscopic and other minimally
                                 invasive techniques to thoracic surgery. Although initially used for the assessment of pleural processes of unknown etiology
                                 (e.g., pleural effusion that has defied diagnosis), VATS techniques are now accepted for treatment of spontaneous pneu-
                                 mothorax due to apical blebs, biopsy of peripheral infiltrates or nodules, talc pleurodesis, drainage of pleural effusions and
                                 other fluid collections, decortication of early empyemas, evaluation and evacuation of traumatic hemothorax, and standard
                                 pulmonary resections, such as wedge resection and lobectomy. Although not appropriate for all non-small-cell lung cancers,
                                 small, peripheral tumors without significant hilar of mediastinal lymph node involvement are often appropriate for VATS
                                 lobectomy. VATS also has been used for lung-volume reduction surgery (see p. 336), esophageal (Heller) myotomy, and
                                 upper dorsal sympathectomy. Less well-accepted procedures include pneumonectomy and esophagectomy.
                                 In all VATS cases, use of a DLT to provide collapse of the ipsilateral lung is mandatory because satisfactory visualiza-
                                 tion of the pleural cavity is impossible without this collapse of the lung. The patient is usually in the lateral position.
                                 Several small incisions are used—usually three, sometimes four or more. The video thoracoscope is placed through the
                                 first incision, and the pleural cavity is inspected. Other small incisions are then made for insertion of instruments. The
                                 position of the video thoracoscope and instruments may be interchanged, depending on the location of the problem.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Pleural disease (e.g., effusions); recurrent empyema; recurrent pneumothorax; localized
                                 lung masses; achalasia; pulmonary infiltrates; hyperhidrosis; reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD)

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                       Lateral

                                  Incision                       Usually 3 to 5 small incisions (portals; Fig. 5-17)

                                  Special instrumentation        Video thoracoscope with thoracoscopy instruments; DLT required.

                                  Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g

===== PAGE 327 =====
Video-Assisted Thoracoscopy Surgery (VATS)        327

                                                                                                   11.5-mm port

                                               Biopsy site                                       Thoracoscopic
                                                                                                 port
                                               11.5-mm port

                                                                                                                                                    Thoracic Surgery
                               Figure 5-17. Example of thoracoscopic port placement. Positioning varies for
                               individual need, but the principle of triangulation used for laparoscopic surgery is
                               equally applicable in the thorax. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ,
                               Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al., eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice.
                               Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia: 1997, 741.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Surgical time               1–3 h

                     Closing considerations      Chest tube placed

                     EBL                         Minimal, although there is a risk for major bleeding.

                     Postop care                 Chest tube

                     Mortality                   Minimal

                     Morbidity                   Major vascular injury: Rare
                                                 Conversion to open thoracotomy: 4%
                                                 Pneumothorax/persistent air leak

                     Pain score                  2–3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                   All age groups

                     Male:Female                 1:1

                     Associated conditions       Pleural effusions; lung mass; pneumothorax

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   As VATS is used for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, this patient population is quite diverse: patients may
                   be of any age group and may present with an asymptomatic mass or be in respiratory distress due to undiagnosed
                   interstitial disease. VATS is also used for nonthoracic procedures such as sympathectomy, pericardial window, and
                   minimally invasive cardiac surgery. For robotic-assisted thoracic surgery (RATS), the requirements are similar to
                   those for a VATS procedure except for (1) lateral decubitus position for prolonged periods of time with the table
                   turned 90 degrees, and (2) limited access to the patient, requiring extensions to vascular lines and anesthetic circuit
                   tubing, and increased difficulty ensuring OLV with a properly positioned DLT.

===== PAGE 328 =====
328   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Respiratory                The preop evaluation should focus on the patient’s ability to tolerate OLV, as well as the
                                                            postop effects of the planned surgery. PFTs and ABG are useful prognostic tests. Question
                                                            patient about dyspnea, productive cough, and cigarette smoking; examine for cyanosis,
                                                            clubbing, RR, and pattern. Listen to chest for wheezes, rhonchi, and rales. Preop lung func-
                                                            tion may be improved by treating respiratory tract infections, stopping smoking for several
                                                            weeks, and treatment with bronchodilators and steroids, as indicated.
                                                            Tests: PFT; CXR; if chest CT available, look for airway anomalies that could interfere with
                                                            DLT placement; ABG.

                                 Cardiovascular             Directed at any underlying disease process.

                                 Laboratory                 As indicated from H&P

                                 Premedication              Standard premedication (see p. B-1). Avoid heavy sedation that might impair postop
                                                            respiratory function.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA, typically with OLV, using DLT or BB (see OLV, p. 288). OLV may be difficult to achieve in
                                 pediatric patients, so chest insufflation with CO2 has been described, but is fraught with risks. Thoracoscopy has also been
                                 described in the awake, sedated patient under local or regional anesthetic technique. Although tissue trauma is significantly
                                 less than with the open thoracotomy, pain scores are not insignificant, and chronic pain syndromes are common. Referred
                                 pain due to lung dissection, chest wall pain due to decortication, and intercostal nerve impingements secondary to trocar
                                 insertion may cause marked postop pain. Multimodal therapy with opioid and NSAID is sufficient in many, but PCA may
                                 on occasion be required. Regional techniques (epidural or paravertebral) should be considered in compromised patients, in
                                 procedures with high conversion risk or in procedures with significant tissue trauma (e.g., decortication).
                                 Regional anesthesia: The incision site is infiltrated with local anesthetics, and intercostal nerve blocks are per-
                                 formed at the level of incision and at several levels above and below incision. The same effect can be accomplished by
                                 multiple-level single-shot paravertebral nerve blocks, which can be performed awake or asleep in the lateral position.
                                 Alternatively, continuous paravertebral or epidural catheters can be placed.
                                 General anesthesia: The patient is intubated with a DLT or BB to selectively collapse the operative lung. Lung
                                 collapse is slower than with thoracotomy because the chest cavity is not completely opened to atmospheric pressure.
                                 To accelerate lung collapse (1) start OLV early, use an FiO2 of 1.0, and apply gentle suction to the unventilated lung;
                                 (2) make sure trocars are opened to atmosphere for 30 to 60 sec following insertion; and (3) CO2 insufflation can be
                                 used to accelerate lung collapse. CO2 insufflation is often well tolerated if begun slowly. There is a risk of venous gas
                                 embolism. Sudden insufflation can result in cardiovascular collapse as a result of ↑ intrathoracic pressure → ↓ BP, ↓
                                 HR and hypoxemia. Insufflated gas will be absorbed and may → hypercarbia.

                                 Induction                  Standard induction (see p. B-2). Placement of DLT is discussed on p. 288.

                                 Maintenance                O2 (60–100%) and isoflurane, desflurane or sevoflurane (0.6–1 MAC). No N2O. Short-
                                                            acting muscle relaxant and opioids as required. Consider remifentanil infusion (0.1–0.2
                                                            mcg/kg/min).

                                 OLV                        See pneumonectomy/ lobectomy for OLV technique. p. 288

                                 Emergence                  Extubation in OR

                                 Blood and fluid            IV: 16–18 ga × 1
                                    requirements            NS/LR @ 2 mL/kg/h

                                 Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                                            ± Arterial line                            Arterial catheter generally not required, unless
                                                                                                      i ndicated by patient’s medical condition.

                                 Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                 See p. 278 for proper positioning.
                                                            3 eyes, ears, genitals

===== PAGE 329 =====
Thymectomy         329

                    Complications              Air leak from lung                          Air leak observed on reexpansion of lung.
                                               Hemorrhage                                  Excessive blood drainage via chest tube; falling Hct
                                               Injury to intrathoracic structures          Repair may require open thoracotomy.
                                               Air embolism

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Tension pneumothorax                        In the absence of chest tube, air leak can → pneumo-
                                                                                           thorax that can progress to tension pneumothorax if
                                                                                           not treated. This may manifest as hyperresonance, ↓
                                                                                           chest-wall movement, dyspnea, subcutaneous
                                                                                           emphysema, tracheal shift, dysrhythmias, cardiovas-
                                                                                            cular collapse, ↓ PO2, and ↓ SaO2.
                                                                                            CXR diagnostic, but need to diagnose clinically if
                                                                                            hemodynamically unstable. Requires immediate de-

                                                                                                                                                                Thoracic Surgery
                                                                                             compression of tension pneumothorax with 14-ga iv
                                                                                             catheter through 2nd intercostal space @ midclavicu-
                                                                                             lar line, followed by chest tube and continuous suction.

                    Pain                       IV opioids, ketorolac (30 mg)               Analgesic requirements less than for lateral thora-
                      management                                                           cotomy, but moderate to severe pain may occur and
                                                                                           chronic pain is not uncommon.
                                               Intrapleural anesthesia                     Intrapleural local anesthetics (0.25% bupivacaine +
                                                                                           1:200,000 epinephrine 0.5 mL/kg) via thoracostomy
                                                                                           drainage tube after lung is reinflated but before
                                                                                           chest tube suction applied.
                                               Epidural or paravertebral                   Indicated in patients with significant comorbidities
                                                                                           and/or for procedures with significant tissue trau-
                                                                                           ma (decortication, lobectomy).

                    Tests                      CXR postop

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Conacher ID: Anaesthesia for thoracoscopic surgery. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2002; 16(1):53–62.
                     2. Harris RJ, Benveniste G, Pfitzner J: Cardiovascular collapse caused by carbon dioxide insufflation during one-lung anaesthesia
                        for thoracoscopic dorsal sympathectomy. Anaesth Intensive Care 2002; 30(1):86–9.
                     3. Hutter J, Miller K, Moritz E: Chronic sequels after thoracoscopic procedures for benign diseases. Eur J Cardithorac Surg 2000;
                        17(6): 687–90.
                     4. Mineo TC: Epidural anesthesia in awake thoracic surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2007; 32(1):13–9.
                     5. Shah JS, Bready LL: Anesthesia for thoracoscopy. Anaesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(1):153–71.
                     6. Steenwyk B, Lyerly III R: Advances in robotic assisted thoracic surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30:699–708.
                     7. Taylor R, Massey S, Stuart-Smith K: Postoperative analgesia in video-assisted thoracoscopy: the role of intercostals blockade.
                        J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2004; 18(3):317–21.
                     8. Tobias JD: Anaesthesia for minimally invasive surgery in children. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2002; 16(1):115–30.

                   THYMECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The two most common indications for thymectomy are myasthenia gravis and thymoma. The se-
                   verity of myasthenia gravis can be classified using the Osserman scheme, which assigns Stage I to patients with
                   ocular symptoms only, with Stages II–IV for progressive degrees of bulbar and systemic symptoms. Indications for
                   surgery versus medical management remain controversial, with some neurologists referring nearly all patients with
                   myasthenia gravis for surgery, whereas others refer only those with the most refractory symptoms. Patients referred

===== PAGE 330 =====
330   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                 for surgery often take a combination of pyridostigmine (Mestinon) and immunosuppressants (steroids and azathio-
                                 prine). In cases of severe myasthenia gravis, preop plasmapheresis may be helpful in minimizing periop muscle weak-
                                 ness. Patients with thymoma may be asymptomatic, although ~10–20% of them have a Hx of myasthenic symptoms.
                                 Thymectomy can be a performed through a complete sternotomy, an upper sternal split (manubrium only), or via a
                                 cervical approach. The value of a complete sternotomy is that it allows for removal of all anterior mediastinal tissue that
                                 may harbor small thymic rests. This is the most invasive approach, however, and the one associated with the greatest
                                 degree of intraop tissue injury. An upper sternal split is performed with the neck extended and a roll placed under the
                                 shoulder blades. Either a short vertical incision or a transverse incision at the level of the sternal angle may be used. Divi-
                                 sion of only the manubrium provides adequate exposure for identification, dissection, and removal of the thymus. Mobi-
                                 lization of the thymus can be accomplished without entering the pleural space. Care must be taken to avoid injuring the
                                 phrenic nerves. In contrast with the removal of anterior mediastinal tumors, thymectomy usually does not require OLV.
                                 Transcervical thymectomy is performed through a collar incision similar to that used for thyroidectomy
                                 (Fig. 7.11-3). The cervical extensions of the thymus are identified and the dissection is advanced progressively into
                                 the neck. Attachments of the gland are cauterized, and a clip is placed on the thymic vein (which drains directly into
                                 the innominate vein). Exposure is aided by a special retractor that elevates the sternum anteriorly and exposes the
                                 anterior mediastinum.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 At the conclusion of the operation—whether it is done through the chest or the neck—the thymic bed is drained with
                                 a small suction drain. Preop medications should be resumed as soon as possible.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Myasthenia gravis; thymoma

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                 Sternotomy                                                Cervical Approach

                                  Position                       Supine                                                    ⇐

                                  Incision                       Median sternotomy                                         Suprasternal

                                  Special instrumentation        None                                                      Special sternal retractor

                                  Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g                                             ⇐

                                  Surgical time                  1–2 h                                                     ⇐

                                  EBL                            < 500 mL                                                  ⇐

                                  Postop care                    ICU — special attention to muscle strength, related       ⇐
                                                                 to respiratory function

                                  Mortality                      < 5%                                                      ⇐

                                  Morbidity                      Infection                                                 ⇐
                                                                 Pneumothorax
                                                                 Hemothorax

                                  Pain score                     5–7                                                       2

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                  Age range                      Usually young adults

                                  Male:Female                    Females > males

                                  Incidence                      Infrequent

                                  Etiology                       Unknown

                                  Associated conditions          Myasthenia gravis; benign or malignant thymoma; other autoimmune diseases
                                                                 (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)

===== PAGE 331 =====
Thymectomy       331

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE

                   Patients presenting for thymectomy may have myasthenia gravis, an autoimmune disease of the neuromuscular
                   junction characterized by muscle weakness and easy fatiguability. Thymomas (benign or malignant) also may be as-
                   sociated with myasthenia gravis. The anesthesiologist needs to be aware of the possible compression effects of the
                   tumor (see Excision of Mediastinal Tumor, p. 308), the potential for respiratory failure, and anticipate complications
                   of various treatment modalities.

                    Respiratory              Patient may have marked reduction in VC 2o muscle weakness; establish baseline spirom-
                                             etry values. Classic (Leventhal) criteria predicting the need for postop ventilation include
                                             duration of disease > 6 yr; chronic comorbid pulmonary disease; pyridostigmine dose > 750
                                             mg/d; VC < 2.9 L. Others include preop use of steroids, and previous episode of respiratory
                                             failure. These predictors have not been widely validated. Inform the patient of the potential

                                                                                                                                                    Thoracic Surgery
                                             requirement for prolonged ventilation.
                                             Tests: PFTs, others as indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular           There is a rare association between myasthenia gravis and cardiomyopathy. Consider ECG
                                             and cardiac consult if indicated from H&P.

                    Neurological             Review neurological assessment. Patients often exhibit diplopia, ptosis, and easy fatigu-
                                             ability of muscles. Difficulties with swallowing and speech are common. Review tests
                                             (EMGs, Tensilon test) done by neurologist to evaluate the adequacy of drug therapy
                                             (steroids, anticholinesterases, azathioprine, and cyclosporin A). Azathioprine (Imuran)
                                             may actually antagonize neuromuscular blockade by inhibiting phosphodiesterase.
                                             Cyclosporin A is reserved for severe disease because of the side effects of renal insuf-
                                              ficiency and HTN. It may prolong neuromuscular blockade. 10–50% of the patients with
                                              thymomas will have myasthenia gravis, and > 85% of myasthenics will have thymus
                                              abnormalities.

                    Musculoskeletal          Determine adequacy of anticholinesterase medication. Evaluate hand strength, inspiratory
                                             efforts, and PFTs. Note that an excess of anticholinesterase agents can cause weakness and
                                             respiratory failure (cholinergic crisis). A deleterious response (weakness) to Tensilon;
                                             administration (10 mg), as well as the presence of cholinergic side effects (e.g., pupil con-
                                             striction), characterize a cholinergic crises. Plasmapheresis may offer temporary (days to
                                             weeks) improvement in symptoms. Typically, patients with worsening symptoms receive
                                             4–8 treatments prior to surgery. There should be a 24-h delay between the last plasmapher-
                                             esis and surgery to restore clotting factors and immunoglobulins. Plasmapheresis also may
                                             transiently decrease plasma cholinesterase, which could prolong the effects of succinylcho-
                                             line, mivacurium, and ester-type local anesthetics.

                    Endocrine                Other autoimmune phenomena occur in 10–15% of myasthenic patients. Elucidate symp-
                                             toms of thyroid or adrenal disease.
                                             Tests: TSH; evaluate screening test if indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Avoid premedication; for the anxious patient, give a small dose of midazolam (0.5–1 mg);
                                             avoid opioids or any other sedatives that may depress ventilation. Current recommenda-
                                             tions for anticholinesterases suggest that, in mild disease without physiological depen-
                                             dence, the morning dose can be held or halved. Patients with severe disease or with marked
                                             anticholinesterase dependence should receive their regular morning dose. For patients on
                                             steroids—depending on dosage and duration of steroid therapy—hydrocortisone (up to
                                             100 mg iv bolus) before induction, then 100 mg q 8 h × 24 h, may be helpful. Note that acute
                                             steroid exposure in naïve patients may paradoxically exacerbate neuromuscular weakness.
                                             Consider aspiration prophylaxis.

===== PAGE 332 =====
332   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA, combined with thoracic or lumbar epidural if transsternal thymectomy. DLT may
                                 be requested by surgeon.

                                 Induction                Inhalational induction with sevoflurane to avoid muscle relaxants entirely; however,
                                                          patients with profound muscle weakness are at risk for aspiration 2° inadequate airway
                                                          protective mechanism. Alternatively, iv propofol induction with remifentanil 1–2 mcg/
                                                          kg (without muscle relaxants). If absolutely necessary, succinylcholine may be used to
                                                          facilitate intubation, although myasthenic patients are considered resistant and require
                                                          a dose of 1.5–2.0 mg/kg to obtain adequate conditions, which then will result in pro-
                                                          longed muscle weakness. Anticholinesterase therapy may prolong the duration of action
                                                          of succinylcholine.

                                 Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Patients with myasthenia gravis have ↑ sensitivity to
                                                          nondepolarizing NMBs, which are rarely ever needed, as maintenance with inhalational
                                                          agents provides adequate neuromuscular relaxation when combined with the existing
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                          baseline weakness. If relaxants are needed, titrate small amounts (1/10 ED95) of drug,
                                                           using a peripheral nerve stimulator to maintain a single twitch. Cisatracurium (20–30
                                                           mcg/kg q 15–20 min or infusion 1–3 mcg/kg/min) is useful because it is rapidly elimi-
                                                           nated. A lternatively, potent inhalation agents may provide adequate muscle relaxation
                                                           and avoid the need for any muscle relaxant. Avoid drugs with neuromuscular blocking
                                                          effects (e.g., antidysrhythmics, calcium channel blockers, diuretics, aminoglycosides, Mg+2,
                                                           iodinated contrast agents). Extremes of temperature, hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia
                                                           may also aggravate neuromuscular weakness and should be prevented. If the patient has
                                                           normal ventilatory function, then spontaneous ventilation during cervical thymectomy
                                                           may be appropriate. Patients undergoing sternotomy, and any patient with ↓ pulmonary
                                                           reserve, require mechanical ventilation.

                                 Emergence                 Criteria for extubation include: head lift (5 sec); MIF > –25 cmH2O; TV > 5 mL/kg; and
                                                          full reversal evidenced by twitch monitor. Extubate when fully awake; usually immediate
                                                          postop ventilation is not necessary. However, because of the variable response to muscle
                                                          relaxation and delayed benefits of the surgery, some patients may require postop ventila-
                                                           tion. Whether intubated or not, monitor patient for pulmonary function by measuring
                                                           MIF and spirometry (Vt). Avoid residual pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade, which
                                                           will → hypoventilation and ↑ risk of gastric aspiration if protective airway reflexes are
                                                           inadequate.

                                 Blood and fluid          IV: 18 ga × 1                          Consider lower extremity iv access when hemor-
                                    requirements          NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                    rhage anticipated.

                                 Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)             Avoid muscle relaxants if possible; use nerve
                                                                                                 stimulator.

                                 Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                                          3 eyes

                                 Complications            Hemorrhage
                                                          Dysrhythmia
                                                          Compression of mediastinal structures
                                                          Pneumothorax

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications            Pneumothorax                        Pleura can be entered–usually the right side; if so, chest
                                                          Respiratory failure                 tube needed. (For Dx and Rx, see VATS, p. 326)
                                                          Phrenic nerve damage
                                                          Myasthenic or cholinergic crises

===== PAGE 333 =====
Excision of Blebs or Bullae        333

                    Pain                        Parenteral opioids (p. C-1)             Avoid respiratory depression; parenteral opioids for
                      management                Epidural opioids (p. C-3)               cervical incision; epidural opioids for median sternoto-
                                                                                        my. Of note, anticholinesterases are reported to poten-
                                                                                        tiate the effect of morphine.

                    Drug                          Usually ↓ anticholinesterase          Reduce daily anticholinesterase by 20%. Beware of
                      management                r equirement in the immediate          “cholinergic” crisis. Sx include ↑ salivation, s weating,
                                                 postop period.                        lacrimation, abdominal cramps, urinary frequency,
                                                                                        fasciculations, and weakness 2° anticholinesterase
                                                                                        overdose. Rx: anticholinergic agent (e.g., atropine)
                                                                                        ± intubation and mechanical ventilation.

                    Tests                       Tensilon (edrophonium)                  Tensilon test may differentiate between myasthenic
                                                                                        (↑ strength) and cholinergic (↓ strength) crises.
                                                Muscle strength                         Determine muscle strength postop (grip strength and
                                                                                        sustained head lift).
                                                Pupil exam                              Pupil dilation (myasthenic crisis); pupil constriction

                                                                                                                                                               Thoracic Surgery
                                                                                        (cholinergic crisis).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1.   Baraka A: Anesthesia and critical care of thymectomy for myasthenia gravis. Chest Surg Clin North Am 2001; 11(2):337–61.
                     2.   Blichfeldt-Lauridsen L, Hansen BD: Anesthesia and myasthenia gravis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2012; 56(1):17–22.
                     3.   Dillon F: Anesthesia issues in the perioperative management of myasthenia gravis. Sem Neurol 2004; 24(1):83–94.
                     4.   Limmer KK, Kernstine KH: Minimally invasive and robotic-assisted thymus resection. Thorac Surg Clin 2011; 21(1):69–83, vii.
                     5.   O’Neill GN: Acquired disorders of the neuromuscular junction. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2006; 42(2):107–21.
                     6.   Shrager JB, Nathan D, Brinster CJ, et al: Outcomes after 151 extended transcervical thymectomies for myasthenia gravis.
                          Ann Thorac Surg 2006; 82(5):1863–9.

                   EXCISION OF BLEBS OR BULLAE
                          SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pulmonary blebs or bullae requiring surgical treatment may vary from small, apical blebs—most usu-
                   ally seen in young people with spontaneous pneumothorax—to expanding, giant bullae causing respiratory distress.
                   Specific indications for bullectomy include large size (> 30% of the lung), recurrent pneumothorax, dyspnea in con-
                   junction with compressed adjacent parenchyma, and recurrent infection of the bullae. The small blebs can be excised
                   through video thoracoscopy (see p. 326), although some surgeons still prefer an open technique for this procedure.
                   Giant bullae are generally removed by open thoracotomy, although these lesions also may be excised by VATS tech-
                   niques. In either case, the goal is to resect the nonfunctional bullae and allow the compressed, yet relatively preserved
                   lung tissue to reexpand and contribute to gas exchange. The surgical technique generally involves stapling across the
                   base of the bulla with reinforcing strips being applied to the staple line to minimize air leak. Alternatively, a clamp
                   and suture technique may be used. However the most important point is that an airtight closure should be obtained
                   as a prolonged air leak can be very debilitating. Patients undergoing operation for giant bullae frequently have lim-
                   ited pulmonary reserve and present formidable operative risks. Because the operation is planned to improve their
                   pulmonary function, however, these patients frequently do well following operation. Pleural abrasion or, rarely,
                   pleurectomy may accompany the excision of blebs or bullae. The blebs in young patients with recurrent spontaneous
                   pneumothorax usually are located at the apex of the upper lobe. Bullae in patients with emphysema are usually in the
                   upper lobe, but may be anywhere in the lung. Preop localization by CT scan is usually sufficient. If a thoracotomy is
                   done, the approach is usually lateral.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Patients with more generalized emphysema may be candidates for lung-
                   volume reduction surgery (see p. 336).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Spontaneous pneumothorax 2° ruptured blebs; giant bullae causing respiratory distress

===== PAGE 334 =====
334   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                Usually lateral

                                  Incision                Axillary

                                  Special                 Staplers
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g

                                  Surgical time           1–3 h

                                  EBL                     < 500 mL

                                  Postop care             PACU → room; ICU or IIC for giant bullae

                                  Mortality               Minimal
        Thoracic Surgery

                                  Morbidity               Air leak: 20% or more in giant bullae

                                  Pain score              5–7

                                  ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                  Age range               Young adults (blebs/small bullae); elderly (large bullae)

                                  Male:Female             3:1

                                  Incidence               Not uncommon

                                  Etiology                Emphysema (usually 2° smoking); congenital; infectious

                                  Associated              Spontaneous pneumothorax; emphysema; long smoking Hx; a-antitrypsin deficiency
                                    conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                                 Patients with apical blebs tend to be young with normal lung function and otherwise healthy. Bleb resection in these
                                 patients tends to be a routine thoracoscopic wedge-resection procedure. Patients with bullous emphysema, on the
                                 other hand, may have end-stage lung disease, often with pulmonary hypertension and RV dysfunction. The risk of
                                 rupture of a bulla/bleb on the nonoperated side, with resultant tension pneumothorax, must be considered through-
                                 out the procedure. The majority of considerations and concerns therefore relate to the patient with bilateral disease.
                                 Most procedures are done thoracoscopically.

                                 Respiratory               Cysts may be bronchogenic, postinfective, infantile, or emphysematous. With blebs, elicit
                                                           Hx of repeat pneumothoraces. Bullae usually result from destruction of alveolar tissue;
                                                           they represent end-stage emphysematous disease associated with severe COPD. Patients
                                                           may have incapacitating dyspnea and limited pulmonary reserve. CO2 retention ± hypoxia
                                                           may be present. Obtain PFTs and ABG for baseline.
                                                           Tests: CXR; presence of pneumothorax; if chest CT available, look for bilateral bullous
                                                           disease and rule out airway anomalies that could interfere with DLT placement; ABG, as
                                                           indicated from H&P.

                                 Cardiovascular            Tests: ECG

                                 Neurological              3 Hx for previous back surgery, peripheral neuropathy. Examine thoracolumbar area for
                                                           skin lesions, infection, deformities.

===== PAGE 335 =====
Excision of Blebs or Bullae       335

                    Hematologic          Transfuse patient with preop Hct < 25% (Hct < 30% if patient has CAD). Cross-match 2 U
                                         of blood or obtain 1–2 U of autologous blood during the month before surgery, or consider
                                         erythropoietin therapy in patients who are anemic.
                                         Tests: Hct

                    Laboratory           Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication        Midazolam 1–2 mg iv if patient anxious and not in respiratory distress. Minimize sedation
                                         if planning epidural placement, as the combination of parenteral sedation and epidural
                                         opioid may result in significant respiratory depression.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA—combined with regional technique if open thoracotomy.

                                         Minor Bleb: standard induction (see p. B-2)

                                                                                                                                                     Thoracic Surgery
                    Induction
                                         Major bullae (particularly bilateral): main issue is risk of pulmonary tamponade/tension
                                         pneumothorax secondary to bulla expansion by PPV. Best to establish lung isolation prior
                                         to instituting PPV (DLT essential in bilateral disease, to allow for ventilation/exclusion
                                         of either side; BB sufficient for unilateral disease). Strategies include awake intubation
                                         (difficult with DLT), spontaneous ventilation induction (inhalational or iv), or, in patients
                                         with easy airway anatomy, a true rapid sequence intubation. Lung isolation should imme-
                                         diately be confirmed with FOB prior to providing PPV. Rapid placement of a chest tube is
                                         essential should a bulla rupture.

                    Maintenance          Patients with severe COPD may have significant auto-PEEP. To avoid worsening dynamic
                                         hyperinflation of lung, treat bronchospasm aggressively and allow adequate expiratory time
                                         (↓ I:E ratio, low RR). Caution with applied PEEP: It may increase total PEEP (and therefore
                                         air trapping). Minimize risk of bulla rupture by reducing ventilatory pressures (low tidal
                                         volumes, permissive hypercapnia and pressure-control ventilation @ < 20 cmH2O). Inha-
                                         lational anesthesia supplemented with epidural, local anesthetics, or iv opioids. Avoid N2O
                                         at all times because bullae may be filled with air.

                    Emergence            Reexpand lung under direct vision to check for major air leaks. Extubate patient early.
                                         Post-bullectomy, unlike other lung resections, patients have greater functional lung tissue
                                         than preop.

                    Blood and fluid      IV: 16 ga × 1                             Excess fluid predisposes to right heart failure. Epidur-
                       requirements      NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                       al local anesthetics can ↓ BP in a volume-restricted
                                         Use vasopressors if hypotensive.          patient; vasopressor often needed (e.g., ephedrine
                                                                                   5–10 mg iv bolus or phenylephrine 50–100 mcg iv
                                                                                   bolus).

                    Monitoring           Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                         Arterial line
                                         ± CVP, ± PA line, ± TEE                   For patients with coexisting severe cardiac disease

                    Positioning          3 and pad pressure points                 See Positioning, p. 278.
                                         3 eyes, ears, genitals
                                         Axillary roll; “airplane” for upper arm

                    Ventilation          DLT or BB needed to separate the          Allows PPV of the nonoperative lung. Use gentle
                                         lungs.                                    PPV (pressure control) with low Vt, permissive
                                                                                   hypercapnea (PaCO2 50–70 mm Hg). Inspiratory
                                                                                   pressure should be as low as possible (~10 cmH2O),
                                                                                   to reduce likelihood of rupture of bullae in nonop-
                                                                                   erative lung. Treat intraop hypoxemia with CPAP
                                                                                   to “up” lung. In extreme cases consider CPB (rare).

===== PAGE 336 =====
336   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                 Complications               Tension pneumothorax                        Can occur on either side during induction, only
                                                                                                         on nonoperated side after chest is open, and again
                                                                                                         on either side postop. Presents with ↑ ventilatory
                                                                                                         pressure, progressive tracheal deviation, wheezing,
                                                                                                         cardiovascular collapse. CXR to r/o tension pneu-
                                                                                                         mothorax. Rx: insertion of chest tube.
                                                             Broncho-pleural-cutaneous fistula           Placement of a chest tube can create a broncho-
                                                                                                         pleural-cutaneous fistula. Rx: low Vt, spontane-
                                                                                                         ous ventilation; may require DLT for differential
                                                             Hypoxia                                     ventilation.
                                                             Hypercarbia                                 3 position of DLT, suction DLT, avoid
                                                             Dysrhythmias                                hypoventilation.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Complications               Hypoventilation                             Ensure complete reversal of muscle relaxants, and
                                                             Dental damage                               patient wide-awake with good respiratory effort
                                                             Airway trauma                               prior to extubation. Obtain ABG if patient has dif-
                                                             Pneumothorax                                ficulty breathing or is overly sedated.
                                                             Hemorrhage
                                                             Risk of aspiration
                                                             Airway obstruction (bronchospasm,           If nerve blocks used to depress gag reflex for awake
                                                             bleeding, dislodged tumor, FB)              FOI, keep patient NPO for several hours postop.

                                 Pain                        Epidural opioids (see p. C-3).              Parenteral opioids + intrapleural local a nesthetics
                                   management                Parenteral opioids                           (0.5% bupivacaine + 1:200,000 epinephrine, 0.5
                                                                                                         mL/kg) + single-shot paravertebral blocks are
                                                                                                         adequate for thoracoscopy.

                                 Tests                       CXR                                         ABG if indicated.

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Brister NW, Barnette RE, Kim V, et al: Anesthetic considerations in candidates for lung volume reduction surgery. Proc Am
                                      Thorac Soc 2008; 5(4):432–7.
                                   2. Gasparini S, Zuccatosta L, Bonifazi M, et al: Bronchoscopic treatment of emphysema: state of the art. Respiration 2012;
                                      84(3):250–63.
                                   3. Palla A, Desideri M, Rossi G, et al: Elective surgery for giant bullous emphysema: a 5-year clinical and functional follow-up.
                                      Chest 2005; 128(4):2043–50.
                                   4. Pompeo E, Tacconi F, Mineo D, et al: The role of awake video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery in spontaneous pneumothorax.
                                      J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 133(3):786–90.
                                   5. Tiong LU, Davies R, Gibson PG, et al: Lung volume reduction surgery for diffuse emphysema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
                                      2006; 18(4):CD001001.

                                 LUNG-VOLUME REDUCTION SURGERY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Lung-volume reduction surgery (LVRS) was initially described by Brantigan in 1958 but reintroduced
                                 by Joel Cooper in 1995 for the treatment of severe emphysema. Typically, patients referred for LVRS are chroni-
                                 cally ill, requiring steroids, bronchodilators, and supplemental O2. With appropriate preoperative selection and
                                 perioperative care, these patients survive surgery and demonstrate improved pulmonary function. P  hysiologically,
                                 reducing the volume of the lung by resecting diseased tissue improves elastic recoil and decreases airway resis-
                                 tance. The chest cavity also is reduced in size, thereby improving chest-wall and diaphragmatic function.

===== PAGE 337 =====
Lung-Volume Reduction Surgery           337

                   The procedure can be carried out either through a median sternotomy or endoscopically. The open approach begins
                   with a median sternotomy. OLV is initiated following opening of the pleurae. Often the diseased portions of the lung
                   remain inflated, whereas healthy areas develop absorption atelectasis. These diseased portions are resected with
                   the aid of a linear stapler. The visceral pleura are very thin; the stapling is done with bovine pericardium to bolster
                   the staple line; and high inspiratory pressures (> 20 cmH2O) must be avoided. From 15–30% of the lung volume may
                   be removed. Following careful examination for air leaks, the pleurae and chest wall are closed.
                   The endoscopic approach is carried out using standard VATS techniques and instrumentation. Diseased tissue will
                   have been identified preop using V/Q and CT scans. Endoscopic forceps are used to guide this diseased tissue into the
                   jaws of the stapler. Again, 15–30% of lung tissue may be removed by this means. At some centers, the anesthesiologist
                   may be asked to measure inspiratory and expiratory volumes. Any difference between these volumes may represent
                   an air leak requiring further exploration. Following this, access ports and the thoracotomy are closed, and chest tubes
                   are placed. The patient is turned over to the opposite side, reprepped and redraped, and the surgery is repeated. With
                   either approach, patients should be extubated in the OR so that no unnecessary ventilatory pressures are put on the
                   lungs. There is usually no suction on the chest tubes and, thus, a water seal is the primary method of controlling
                   the pleural cavity pressures. A small pneumothorax (≤ 10%) is acceptable if the patient is not in respiratory distress.
                   A functional epidural catheter, early extubation, and the avoidance of chest tube suction are important to the success

                                                                                                                                                           Thoracic Surgery
                   of this procedure, especially in the very ill patient. Pleural drainage consists of two chest tubes per side; in contrast with
                   lobectomy however, they are often left to water seal so as not to exert excessive negative pressure on the lung and dis-
                   rupt the staple lines. Ideally, patients are extubated at the conclusion of the operation. Because their respiratory status
                   is often tenuous, close monitoring, vigorous pulmonary toilet, and good pain control are essential in the postop period.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: COPD (emphysema)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                   Open LVRS                                        Endoscopic LVRS

                     Position                      Supine                                           Lateral decubitus

                     Incision                      Sternotomy                                       Minilateral thoracotomy

                     Special instrumentation       Stapling devices; DLT                            ⇐+ Endoscopic instrumentation

                     Unique considerations         Bovine pericardium to bolster staple line        ⇐

                     Antibiotics                   Cefazolin 1 g                                    ⇐

                     Surgical time                 2h                                               45–60 min/side

                     Closing considerations        Avoid high PIPs (> 20 cmH2O)                     ⇐

                     EBL                           Minimal                                          ⇐

                     Postop care                   Extubated in OR; avoid chest tube suction        ⇐

                     Mortality                      ≤ 5–10%                                         ⇐

                     Morbidity                     Pneumothorax                                     ⇐
                                                   Infection                                        ⇐
                                                   Tearing of suture line                           ⇐
                                                   Wound healing problems                           ⇐

                     Pain score                    6–8                                              4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                   > 50 yr

                     Male:Female                 Male > female

                     Incidence                   Although the incidence of emphysema is high in the general population, only a fraction of
                                                 these patients will be candidates for LVRS.

                     Etiology                    Smoking; genetic factors

                     Associated conditions       CAD; pulmonary HTN; PVD; cerebrovascular disease

===== PAGE 338 =====
338   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                 Table 5.3. Suggested Selection Criteria for LVRS
                                 Medical history                 Severe COPD (emphysema rather than chronic bronchitis)
                                                                 Age < 75 yr
                                                                 No cigarette smoking for 6 mo
                                                                 Lowest effective prednisone dose
                                                                 No previous chest surgery
                                 Pulmonary function              FEV1 >30–35% of predicted
                                                                 PaCO2 < 50 mm Hg
                                                                 TLC > l20% of predicted
                                 Cardiac function                Mean PAP < 35 mm Hg (if pulmonary HTN is suspected).
                                                                 No evidence of LV dysfunction on dobutamine stress testing (if Hx of angina or CHF is
                                                                 present)
                                 Radiographic                    Hyperinflation; flattened diaphragm (CXR)
                                                                 Decreased upper lobe perfusion (Ventilation-Perfusion scan)
                                                                 Emphysema, with upper lobe predominance (CT scan)
                                 Relative exclusion criteria     Continued smoking
        Thoracic Surgery

                                                                 Illness other than emphysema that may cause severe dyspnea (e.g., CAD; CHF; cancer;
                                                                     interstitial lung disease; bronchiectasis)
                                                                 Severe malnutrition
                                                                 Obliteration of pleural space (e.g., pleurodesis or pleurectomy)
                                                                 Previous thoracic surgery
                                                                 Morbid obesity
                                                                 Severe pulmonary HTN (mean PAP > 35)
                                                                 Chest-wall deformity with restrictive lung disease (e.g., kyphoscoliosis; severe pectus
                                                                     deformity; PaCO2 > 55 mm Hg)

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                                 LVRS involves either laser thermal contraction or surgical resection of emphysematous lung tissue. Patients have
                                 end-stage emphysema with associated pulmonary HTN and RV dysfunction. These patients are a great challenge to
                                 the anesthesiologist because it may be difficult to maintain relatively normal physiologic parameters intraop and to
                                 have an awake, comfortable, and spontaneously breathing patient at the completion of surgery.

                                 Respiratory              These patients have advanced pulmonary emphysema. Examine patient for cyanosis, club-
                                                          bing, RR and pattern. Listen to chest—breath sounds are often very distant or absent. Hx
                                                          should include use of O2 supplementation, recent infection, severe bronchospasm, prior
                                                          surgery on the chest, and other associated diseases, such as CAD or CHF.
                                                          Tests: PFT (± bronchodilators). Hyperinflation usually is indicated by TLC and RV value
                                                          > 120%; V/Q scan; CXR; chest CT scan; noninvasive exercise test (6-min walk); preop
                                                          ABG—check for hypoxemia, hypercarbia.

                                 Cardiovascular           These patients often have coexisting cardiac disease with pulmonary HTN.
                                                          Tests: Right heart function can be determined by echocardiography or selective right heart
                                                          catheterization, if indicated by H&P.

                                 Premedication            Avoid premedication with sedative or opioids—cannot have respiratory depressants—
                                                          patients have severe COPD, often are CO2 retainers.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA (with DLT or BB) ± epidural anesthesia. Place and test epidural catheter before sur-
                                 gery. (See Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, pp. 281.)

===== PAGE 339 =====
Lung-Volume Reduction Surgery         339

                    Induction         Standard induction (see p. B-2). DLT or BB absolutely necessary during surgery to selec-
                                      tively ventilate each lung. DLT preferable if severe bilateral disease with increased risk of
                                      pneumothorax (See Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, p. 281).

                    Maintenance       Inhalational agent and/or propofol. IV opioids and sedative agents should not be used
                                      (exception, remifentanil infusion intraop). Anesthesia may be supplemented by continuous
                                      or bolus administration of epidural anesthetics. Mechanical ventilation with O2 and inhala-
                                      tion agent only. During TLV: Vt = 6–10 mL/kg, limit PIP to < 25 cmH2O (best to use PCV).
                                      Respiratory rate and inspiratory flow should be adjusted to minimize air trapping (low
                                      RR, long E-time). Beware of overinflation and “breath stacking,” which can → pulmonary
                                      tamponade with severe ↓ BP and ↑ airway resistance. ABG to determine ETCO2–PaCO2
                                      gradient. During OLV use PCV for Vt = 4–8 mL/kg, long E-time, RR 6–10, and permis-
                                      sive hypercapnia (PaCO2: 50–70 mm Hg); monitor lung compliance closely because the
                                      ventilated lung also has emphysema/bullous disease. Avoid overdistention with hyperin-
                                      flation (→ pneumothorax) on ventilated, nonoperated lung. Patients with severe COPD
                                      may have significant auto-PEEP. To avoid dynamic hyperinflation of lung, treat broncho-

                                                                                                                                             Thoracic Surgery
                                      spasm aggressively, allow adequate expiratory time (↓ I:E ratio), limit PIP to 15–20 cmH2O,
                                      and cautiously use applied PEEP, as it may increase total PEEP (best managed with in-line
                                      spirometry). Moderate hypercapnia is well tolerated, but higher levels may result in sig-
                                      nificant pulmonary HTN, RV dysfunction, and tachydysrhythmias. CPAP to nonventilated
                                      lung may be necessary to maintain oxygenation.
                                      Maintenance of hemodynamic stability may require pressor support (e.g., ephedrine,
                                      phenylephrine, dopamine). Dynamic hyperinflation of the lung (pulmonary tamponade)
                                      during mechanical ventilation should be suspected if ↓ BP with ↑ PIP occurs.

                    Emergence         Emergence is a critical time for these patients. All physiologic parameters need to be opti-
                                      mized. Air leaks are common and may be worsened by prolonged mechanical ventilation,
                                      coughing, or straining on the ETT. Different options are available to achieve those goals,
                                      including deep extubation or deep conversion to spontaneous pressure-support ventila-
                                      tion. Either way, ventilation has to be assisted until patients are wide-awake, comfort-
                                      able, warm, and maintaining adequate respiration with minimal support. These patients
                                      are critically dependent on good analgesia, upright/sitting position, and suctioning to
                                      ↓ mucous plugging (can be catastrophic). Recovery from GA occurs in the OR and may take
                                      1–2 h. Ventilatory assistance via face mask with supplemental O2 is usually necessary. ABG
                                      and CXR may be useful. When spontaneous ventilation and analgesia are satisfactory, the
                                      patient is transported to ICU. If postop mechanical ventilation is required, consider using
                                      pressure support ventilation with low levels of CPAP. The CPAP may help minimize the
                                      inspiratory work of breathing caused by lung hyperinflation. The pressure support mode of
                                      ventilation will permit control of airway pressure, while allowing patient control of PaCO2.
                                      If postop intubation is anticipated, changing from DLT to ETT is required.

                    Blood and fluid   IV: 14–16 ga × 1                       Fluid management to restore preop deficit and pro-
                       requirements   NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                    vide maintenance fluid, but restrict fluids similar to
                                      Autologous PRBC                        lung resection surgery. Replace minor blood loss with
                                                                             colloid. Transfuse autologous blood for Hct < 30.

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        (See Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, p. 281).
                                      Arterial line                          3 ABGs: baseline (preop) during sternotomy; 15
                                      Urinary catheter                       min after initiation of OLV; 15 min after initiation
                                                                             of OLV on the second lung; during closure of ster-
                                                                             notomy; prior to extubation.
                                      CVP and/or PA line                     Useful for postop fluid management.
                                                                             Depending on level of PHTN, RV dysfunction and
                                                                             co-morbid CAD

                    Positioning       3 and pad pressure points              Axillary roll and support for upper airway is neces-
                                      3 eyes, ears, genitals                 sary for the lateral decubitus position. (See Lobec-
                                                                             tomy, Pneumonectomy, p. 281.)

===== PAGE 340 =====
340   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications              Hypercarbia
                                                            Hypoxemia
                                                            Air leak/pneumothorax
                                                            Hemorrhage

                                 Pain                       Lumbar or thoracic epidural               Essential that patient be comfortable. Begin in-
                                   management               opioids                                   fusion of epidural opioids and local anesthetics
                                                            ± local anesthetics (see p. C-3).         (see Lobectomy, Pneumonectomy, p. 281). Break-
                                                                                                      through pain treatment options include iv hydro-
                                                                                                      morphone (cautious boluses of 0.2–0.5 mg) and/or
                                                                                                      ketorolac (10–30 mg).

                                 Suggested Readings
                                   1. Brister NW, Barnette RE, Kim V, et al: Anesthetic considerations in candidates for lung volume reduction surgery. Proc Am
        Thoracic Surgery

                                      Thorac Soc 2008; 5(4):432–7.
                                   2. Fishman A, Martinez F, Naunheim K, et al: A randomized trial comparing lung-volume-reduction surgery with medical
                                      therapy for severe emphysema. N Engl J Med 2003; 348(21):2059–73.
                                   3. Geddes D, Davies M, Koyama H, et al: Effect of lung-volume-reduction surgery in patients with severe emphysema. N Engl J
                                      Med 2000; 343(4):239–45.
                                   4. National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group: Patients at high risk of death after lung-volume-reduction surgery.
                                      N Engl J Med 2001; 345(15):1075–83.
                                   5. Tschernko EM: Anesthesia considerations for lung volume reduction surgery. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):591–609.

                                 BRONCHOPULMONARY LAVAGE
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: Whole-lung bronchopulmonary lavage is occasionally required for patients with pulmonary alveolar
                                 proteinosis—a condition characterized by excessive (or abnormal) surfactant production with resultant flooding of
                                 the lungs with proteinaceous fluid. Although the underlying cause of the condition is unclear, treatment consists
                                 of periodic whole-lung lavage and, more recently, GM-CSF administration. It is our practice to perform unilateral
                                 lavage only, although single-session, bilateral lavage has been reported. After induction of GA, a DLT is placed, and
                                 the correct position is confirmed bronchoscopically. The lung is then lavaged in aliquots of 500–1000 mL NS to dilute
                                 and wash out excess alveolar surfactant, pus, or mucus and to obtain material for cytological and histochemical
                                 examination. Care should be taken not to overdistend the lung, and a running tally of fluid instilled and withdrawn
                                 should be performed to avoid overhydrating the patient. Frequently, 9–12 L of fluid are used, with the initial effluent
                                 being very cloudy and the final effluent being clear. Techniques that may improve the distribution of the lavage fluid
                                 include external chest percussion and tilting the operating table (laterally as well as in the craniocaudal directions).
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; refractory asthma; cystic fibrosis; bronchiectasis; lipoid
                                 pneumonitis; silicosis; alveolar microlithiasis; inhalation of radioactive dust

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                  Position                 Supine or lateral decubitus

                                  Special                  Bronchoscope; DLT; lavage fluids
                                    instrumentation

                                  Antibiotics              None

                                  Surgical time            45 min/side

                                  EBL                      None

===== PAGE 341 =====
Bronchopulmonary Lavage      341

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care            PACU → home

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Aspiration of lavage fluid
                                            Pneumothorax/hydrothorax
                                            Atelectasis

                     Pain score             1–2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              17–35 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                                                                                                                                                       Thoracic Surgery
                     Incidence              Uncommon

                     Etiology               Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; cystic fibrosis; bronchiectasis; lipoid pneumonitis; silicosis

                     Associated             Asthma and other abnormalities of lung function
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Although whole-lung lavage is primarily a treatment for pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, it is also used as a therapeu-
                   tic modality for many other lung-related conditions (see Usual preop diagnosis, above). Respiratory dysfunction of
                   variable symptomatology is expected in these patients. Indications for whole-lung lavage include dyspnea on exer-
                   tion, resting room air PaO2 < 60 mm Hg, or shunt fraction > 10–12%. Because the procedure requires GA with OLV,
                   it is recommended that preop V/Q scans be obtained so that unilateral lung irrigation can be performed first on the
                   more severely affected lung. If both lungs are equally diseased, lavage should be performed on the left lung initially
                   to allow the larger right lung to be used for ventilation to provide better gas exchange. Patients then return in sub-
                   sequent days or weeks for therapeutic lavage of the contralateral lung. A nonoperative treatment option for pulmo-
                   nary alveolar proteinosis using granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has shown promise
                   for some patients with the acquired form of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.

                    Respiratory              Patients with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis generally present with cough (nonproductive >
                                             productive), dyspnea, and fatigue. Physical findings consist of diffuse rales ± clubbing or cya-
                                             nosis. CXR typically reveals diffuse bilateral patchy airspace consolidation. Pulmonary compli-
                                             ance is reduced 2° the restrictive disease pattern. PFTs show ↓ TLC, ↓ RV, ↓ VC, and ↓ DLCO.
                                             Though nonspecific, baseline ABGs classically demonstrate respiratory alkalosis and hypox-
                                             emia, with a calculated elevation in A-a DO2 gradient. Some patients may be O2-dependent or
                                             have concomitant COPD 2° Hx of smoking. Secondary infections, especially in the respiratory
                                             tract, are well recognized risks in these patients. Cessation of smoking (> 6–8 wk) and prompt
                                             treatment of any underlying infections before whole-lung lavage may be prudent.
                                             Tests: CXR; PFT; ABG; V/Q scans; ± CT

                    Cardiovascular           Directed at any underlying disease process.

                    Laboratory               Abnormal elevation of serum LDH has been reported in some patients and has been shown
                                             to correlate with the severity of A-a DO2.
                                             Tests: LDH; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Standard premedication (see p. B-1). Avoid heavy sedation that might impair adequate
                                             gas exchange before induction. O2 supplementation may be required after premedication.

===== PAGE 342 =====
342   s e c t i o n 5.0   Thoracic Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                                 Anesthetic technique: GETA is required with OLV (see p. 288) using a DLT. In pediatric patients or small
                                 adults where appropriate sized DLT is not available, and in patients who cannot tolerate OLV, the use of partial
                                 venoarterial CPB, venovenous bypass, or even ECMO has been reported. In some cases, sequential lobar lavage
                                 with smaller volume of lavage fluid has been achieved under conscious sedation for those patients in whom OLV
                                 is not possible.

                                 Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2) with thorough preoxygenation. The largest DLT should be
                                                          used to facilitate infusion and drainage of the lavage fluid. (Placement of DLT is discussed
                                                          on p. 288.) Due to the underlying impaired respiratory function in these patients, institut-
                                                          ing OLV will further compromise gas exchange. It is imperative to avoid spillage of lavage
                                                          fluid into the ventilated lung during the procedure. This is achieved by verifying the correct
                                                          position of the DLT with FOB and confirming the competency of the cuff seal by testing it
                                                          against pressures as high as 50 cm H2O. Baseline individual lung compliance, airway pres-
                                                          sures, and ABG should be 3’d after DLT placement.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Maintenance              100% FiO2 with inhalational agent (e.g., sevoflurane) or TIVA using propofol and remifen-
                                                          tanil infusions. Muscle relaxation is necessary to avoid movement or coughing that can
                                                          cause leakage of lavage fluid into the ventilated lung. Because chest physiotherapy, includ-
                                                          ing vibration and percussion, is required after each cycle of lavage filling, any deleterious
                                                          change from baseline lung compliance decrease or airway pressure increase of the venti-
                                                          lated lung should prompt the anesthesiologist to look for evidence of spillage. Filling the
                                                          nonventilated lung with lavage fluid can → ↓ pulmonary shunting (→ improved O2 sat)
                                                          and ↑ PVR (→ ↓ CO). Draining the lavage fluid can → ↑ pulmonary shunting (→ ↓ O2 sat)
                                                          and ↓ PVR (→ ↑ CO). Accurate inflow and outflow volume of the lavage fluid should be
                                                          recorded to ensure return volumes are 90%.

                                 Emergence                At the conclusion of surgery, the lavaged lung should be adequately suctioned to remove
                                                          any residual fluid. Bilateral lung ventilation should be reinstituted. Because the compliance
                                                          of the lavaged lung is greatly reduced, higher airway pressures are required to re-expand
                                                          it, but at the risk of causing barotrauma to the nonlavaged lung. A brief period of OLV to
                                                          the lavaged lung, using large TVs or ↑ airway pressure, may be necessary to recruit the col-
                                                          lapsed alveoli (higher pressure, including PEEP, is needed to counter the increase in surface
                                                          tension after the removal of significant amounts of surfactant). The patient’s trachea should
                                                          be extubated after adequate reversal of muscle relaxation; however, if prolonged postop
                                                          ventilation is anticipated (e.g., in those who aspirated lavaged fluid to the ventilated lung),
                                                          changing the DLT to single lumen tube is indicated. DLT should be maintained for patients
                                                          in whom differential lung ventilation is required postop.

                                 Blood and fluid          IV: 18 ga × 1
                                    requirements          NS/LR @ 1–2 mL/kg/h

                                 Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Although warmed lavage fluid is used, some
                                                          Arterial line                           patients may become hypothermic after several
                                                                                                   hours of lavage under GETA.
                                                          ± CVP line                               CVP or PA line only needed as indicated by comor-
                                                          ± PA line                                bid conditions. Consider fluoroscopic or TEE guided
                                                                                                   positioning of a PA catheter to the lavaged lung.
                                                                                                   In doing so, the therapeutic potential of the catheter
                                                                                                   may be realized. Selective occlusion of pulmonary
                                                                                                   arterial blood flow can improve matching of blood
                                                                                                   flow to ventilation.

===== PAGE 343 =====
Bronchopulmonary Lavage            343

                    Positioning                Supine                                     Some prefer the lavaged lung to be dependent to
                                               3 and pad pressure points                  minimize the risk of contaminating the contralat-
                                               3 eyes                                     eral lung with lavage fluid. Others prefer the lavaged
                                                                                          lung to be nondependent because, in this position,
                                                                                          perfusion will more closely match ventilation in
                                                                                          the dependent lung. As a compromise, we perform
                                                                                          lavage with the patient supine. However, intermit-
                                                                                          tent manipulation of the patient position may be
                                                                                          required to facilitate the lavage and drainage of
                                                                                          any retained fluid. Prevention of DLT displacement
                                                                                          during repositioning is paramount.

                    Complications              Hypoxemia                                  Hypoxemia during OLV is most commonly 2° luminal
                                                                                          obstruction (by blood or pulmonary secretions) of the
                                                                                          DLT, worsening of shunting, or malposition of DLT.
                                                                                          Rx: suctioning of the DLT; PEEP to ventilated lung
                                                                                          (may ↑ shunting); return to two-lung ventilation; and

                                                                                                                                                              Thoracic Surgery
                                                                                          3 DLT position. In extreme cases, temporarily inflat-
                                                                                          ing the balloon of the PA catheter (if available) may be
                                                                                          necessary to improve shunting and, thus, oxygenation.
                                                                                          Inadequate positioning of the DLT demands stopping
                                                                                          further instillation of fluid. Most authors recommend
                                                                                          suspending the lavage fluid 30 cm above the midaxil-
                                                                                          lary line. Instilling fluid from excessive height or under
                                                                                          pressure may precipitate pulmonary edema.
                                               Hypercarbia                                Ensure adequate TV and RR.
                                               Aspiration                                 3 DLT position. Turn patient to lavaged side down
                                                                                          and head down, suction the ventilated lung, reinstitute
                                                                                          bilateral lung ventilation with PEEP, after the lavaged
                                                                                          lung is thoroughly drained and suctioned. Termination
                                                                                          of procedure may be needed in severe cases. Patient
                                                                                          may need to be kept intubated after the procedure.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Pneumothorax                               Obtain CXR; conservative measures if small pneu-
                                               Hydrothorax                                mothorax or hydrothorax. Otherwise, chest tube
                                                                                          placement will be required.
                                               Atelectasis                                Decrease in surfactant after lavage will → airspace
                                                                                          collapse. Most patients will experience moderate
                                                                                          coughing, which will help reexpand the atelectatic
                                                                                          lung units.

                    Pain                       Parental opioids or NSAID (ketoro-         Some patients may experience chest pain due to
                      management               lac 30 mg iv)                              vigorous intraop percussion.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Ben-Abraham R, Greenfeld A, Rozenman J, et al: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: step-by-step perioperative care of the
                        whole lung lavage procedure. Heart Lung 2002; 31(1):43–9.
                     2. Bussieres JS: Whole lung lavage. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19(3):543–58.
                     3. Cohen E, Eisenkraft JB: Bronchopulmonary lavage: effects on oxygenation and hemodynamics. J Cardiothorac Anesth 1990;
                        4(5):609–15.
                     4. Venkateshiah SB, Yan TD, Bonfield TL, et al: An open-label trial of granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor therapy
                        for moderate symptomatic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Chest 2006; 130(1):227–37.

===== PAGE 344 =====
344   s e c t i o n 5.0    Thoracic Surgery

                                 LUNG TRANSPLANT
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                 Description: The most common indications for lung transplantation include emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic
                                 fibrosis, and pulmonary hypertension. Patients with the first three of these diagnoses have marked abnormalities
                                 in mechanical pulmonary function, whereas patients with pulmonary HTN often have normal lung mechanics but
                                 very abnormal cardiac function. Patients with emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis often receive single-lung trans-
                                 plants, and those with cystic fibrosis require double-lung transplants. The best operation for patients with pulmonary
                                 hypertension continues to be debated, with options including single-lung, double-lung, and heart-lung transplan-
                                  tation (see p. 469). Although candidates for lung transplantation, by definition, have end-stage lung disease, their
                                  overall state of health and functional abilities vary considerably. Furthermore, although these patients all have poor
                                  pulmonary function, many with multisystem disease are eliminated during the preop screening process. Thus, the
                                  remaining patients are generally well motivated and free of significant cardiac, renal, and vascular disease.
        Thoracic Surgery

                                 Single-lung transplants generally are carried out through a thoracotomy incision. Patients with emphysema as the
                                 underlying disease rarely require CPB, whereas those with pulmonary fibrosis (↓ pulmonary reserve, and ↑ incidence
                                 of pulmonary HTN) more commonly require bypass. Although the need for bypass can be assessed at the outset of the
                                 operation by instituting OLV, a CPB circuit and perfusionist should always be available. The route for vascular access for
                                 bypass (transthoracic or through the groin vessels) must be considered by the surgeon at the start of the case.
                                 Double-lung transplants generally are done through bilateral anterior thoracotomies or a single bilateral “clamshell”
                                 incision (Fig. 5-2). Mobilization of the lung is facilitated by use of a DLT. If the patient does not tolerate OLV, CPB can
                                 be established using aortic and atrial cannulation. Some surgeons routinely use a single-lumen ETT, with a defined
                                 plan for using CPB.
                                 The procedure for both single- and double-lung transplantation is the same for each side. The native lung is mobilized,
                                 and the bronchovascular structures are divided. Mediastinal adenopathy and extensive pleural adhesions are the rule,
                                 rather than the exception, for patients with cystic fibrosis. Such pneumonectomies take significantly longer than those for
                                 emphysema. Once the native lung is removed, the donor lung is brought into the surgical field. The bronchial anastomo-
                                 sis is created first, and the lung is allowed to fall into the posterior costovertebral gutter. The venous anastomosis (atrial
                                 cuff anastomosis) is fashioned next. The final sutures are placed but left untied for later deairing. The arterial anastomosis
                                 is created last. Upon removal of the arterial clamp, the lung is perfused and deaired. The venous sutures are then tied and
                                 the atrial clamp is removed. After ensuring that the vascular anastomoses are hemostatic and that there is no air leak at
                                 the bronchial site, the incision is closed or, in the case of double-lung transplant, attention is directed to the other side.
                                 The anesthesiologist should be aware that hypotension is not uncommon on reperfusion of the donor lung, but that
                                 it usually resolves spontaneously. Specific immunosuppression protocols vary from institution to institution, but
                                 intravenous administration of steroids immediately before lung reperfusion is a common practice. Lung transplant
                                 patients typically are left intubated following surgery; however, changing from a DLT to a single-lumen tube at the
                                 conclusion of the operation facilitates postop ET suctioning.
                                 Usual preop diagnosis: COPD; pulmonary fibrosis; cystic fibrosis; pulmonary HTN; Eisenmenger’s syndrome
                                 For Summary of Procedure and Anesthetic Management, see Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation,
                                 p. 469, and Anesthetic Considerations for Lung Transplantation, p. 471.

                                 Suggested Viewing
                                 Links are available online to the following videos:
                                 Part 1 of 3 VATS Thoracoscopic Lobectomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LPwsnQY3HkQ
                                 Thoracotomy (On-Q catheter insertion for post-thoracotomy pain management):
                                 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XX_e4wTQ-90
                                 chest tube insertion: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EcIDkJHRq8c
                                 Decompressing A Tension Pneumothorax: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HbCuqpvx2EU
                                 Thoracoscopic: Right Lower Lobectomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgI4EcL0fDE
                                 Sleeve Pneumonectomy for Lung Cancer: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GitI8FAU_vo

