# 6_CARDIOVASCULAR_SURGERY
# Source: 6 CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 6.0 Cardiovascular Surgery
# Pages: 348-478
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Cardiopulmonary Bypass (p. 348)
- Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery (p. 354)
- Left Ventricular Aneurysmectomy (p. 360)
- Aortic Valve Replacement (p. 361)
- Mitral Valve Repair Or Replacement (p. 365)
- Tricuspid Valve Repair (p. 369)
- Septal Myectomy/Myotomy (p. 372)
- Pacemaker Insertion (p. 376)
- Pericardiectomy (p. 379)
- Off-Pump And Minimally Invasive Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (p. 384)
- Port-Access Coronary Revascularization (p. 389)
- Limited Thoracotomy And Port-Access Approaches To Valve Surgery (p. 394)
- Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures (p. 396)
- Carotid Endarterectomy (Vascular) (p. 406)
- Repair Of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms (p. 409)
- Endovascular Stent-Grafting Of Aortic Aneurysms (p. 412)
- Repair Of Acute Aortic Dissections (p. 416)
- Repair Of Aneurysms Of The Thoracoabdominal Aorta (p. 422)
- Surgery Of The Abdominal Aorta (p. 428)
- Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass Cardiovascular (p. 434)
- Lumbar Sympathectomy (p. 439)
- Or Vein Excision (p. 442)
- Surgery For Portal Hypertension (p. 444)
- Arteriovenous Access For Hemodialysis (p. 451)
- Permanent Vascular Access (p. 453)
- Venous Surgery—Vein Stripping And Perforator Ligation (p. 457)
- Varicose Vein Stripping And Ablation (p. 458)
- Surgery For Heart Transplantation (p. 464)
- Surgery For Lung And Heart/Lung Transplantation (p. 469)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                     6.0 CARDIOVASCULAR
                                      surgery

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                                      6.1 Cardiac Surgery

                                           surgeon
                                           R. Scott Mitchell, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Linda E. Foppiano, MD
                                           Lawrence C. Siegel, MD
                                           Daryl Oakes, MD

===== PAGE 348 =====
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             The development of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) technology has allowed the repair of many congenital and
                             acquired lesions of the heart and great vessels. Designed to replace cardiac and pulmonary functions, full CPB
                             requires a blood pump and oxygenator. The pump may be of the roller-head or centrifugal variety with the latter pro-
                             ducing less trauma to formed blood elements. The oxygenator may bubble gases (O2 and CO2) through a blood-filled
                             reservoir (bubble oxygenator) or allow O2 and CO2 to diffuse through a thin membrane into the surrounding blood
                             (membrane oxygenator). Utilization of any blood pump requires at least partial heparinization (ACT > 180 sec), and
                             introduction of an oxygenator mandates full heparinization (ACT > 400 sec).
                             Full CPB typically drains systemic venous return via the right atrium into a venous reservoir, from which the blood
                             is pumped through an oxygenator and then returned to the aorta or femoral artery, completely bypassing the heart
                             and lungs (Figs 6.1-1 and 6.1-2). Partial CPB usually supports only a portion of the body—typically the infradia-
                             phragmatic portion—and may use the patient’s lungs as an oxygenator (left atrium → femoral artery) or a mechanical
                             oxygenator (femoral vein → femoral artery). Full CPB is utilized during a sternotomy for work on the heart, ascend-
                             ing aorta, and transverse arch. Partial CPB, in which some systemic venous blood returns to the heart and is ejected
                             into the aorta, is normally used for work on the descending or thoracoabdominal aorta. Heparin-coated components,
     Cardiovascular

                             which partially eliminate the necessity for heparin, are available.
        Surgery

                             After exposure of the relevant organs (heart or descending thoracic aorta), and after heparinization, venous and
                             arterial cannulae must be placed intraluminally. Cannulation of the heart usually involves venous drainage from the
                             right atrium, with either two cannulae inserted through the atrium into the SVC and IVC (bicaval), or via a larger,
                             dual-stage cannula draining the right atria and IVC. Bicaval cannulation reduces venous return (and rewarming) to
                             the heart, and allows caval snares to be placed so that the right atrium can be opened without introducing air into the
                             venous return. Occasionally, atrial manipulation for cannulation can depress CO with resultant hypotension. This
                             usually can be reversed with volume replacement. Aortic cannulation usually is not associated with any physiologic
                             perturbation, although HTN must be avoided to minimize aortic complications. After the cannulae are in place and
                             connections are made to the bypass circuit, CPB may be instituted electively. Most cardiac operations are conducted
                             under mild hypothermia (28°C), unless profound hypothermic circulatory arrest is to be utilized. In that case, a target
                             temperature of 16–18°C is desirable. For operations on the descending thoracic aorta, normothermia is maintained.
                             Cessation of CPB is accomplished by gradually decreasing pump flows, allowing for right heart filling, and gradually
                             replenishing the circulating blood volume. Pulmonary and coronary vasodilations are mandatory during this phase,
                             as there appears to be heightened vasoreactivity after periods of ischemia and hypothermia. For periods of cardiac
                             arrest, during which the heart is deprived of its arterial blood supply, the metabolic demands of the myocardium
                             must be minimized. This usually is accomplished by achieving diastolic arrest with a hyperkalemic cardioplegic solu-
                             tion and also by lowering myocardial temperature to < 15°C. Frequent reinfusions of cardioplegia maintain hypother-
                             mia, prevent lactic acid accumulation, and deliver some minimally available dissolved O2.
                             The physiologic response to CPB is complex and is associated with a massive catecholamine release that resolves
                             after its cessation. Subsequent changes include abnormal bleeding tendencies, increased capillary permeability, leu-
                             kocytosis, renal dysfunction, and impairment of the immune response. Hemodilution, nonpulsatile flow, hypother-
                             mia, exposure of formed elements to nonendothelial surfaces, complement activation, protein denaturation, cascad-
                             ing effects within the coagulation and fibrinolytic system, and activation of the kallikrein-bradykinin cascade, all
                             contribute to this unphysiologic state, and account for much of the morbidity and mortality after CPB.
                             Many physiologic variables are now controlled by the anesthesiologist, perfusionist, and surgeon, including systemic
                             flow and perfusion pressure, arterial O2 and CO2, temperature, and Hct. Other physiologic parameters follow either
                             directly or indirectly. Thus, physiologic monitoring for the anesthesiologist and perfusionist include, at a minimum,
                             arterial pressure, CVP, ABG determination (preferably online during CPB), CO, UO, and ECG. Constant commu-
                             nication among surgeons, perfusionist, and anesthesiologist is mandatory for a smooth operation. Transesophageal
                             echocardiography (TEE) is rapidly becoming standard practice for cardiac surgery.
                             Secondary effects of CPB demand some special considerations during the final stages of the procedure and chest
                             closure. Adverse effects on coagulation have already been mentioned, and vigorous attention to maintenance and
                             replacement of coagulation factors is essential. The capillary leak phenomenon results in interstitial myocardial and
                             pulmonary edema. Decreased myocardial performance and compliance mandate an increased preload, especially

                      348

===== PAGE 349 =====
Cardiopulmonary Bypass   349

                                                                                                                                              Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                 Surgery
                               Figure 6.1-1. Detailed schematic diagram of the arrangement of a typical
                               cardiopulmonary bypass circuit using a membrane oxygenator with integral hard-
                               shell venous reservoir (lower center) and external cardiotomy reservoir. Venous
                               cannulation is by a cavoatrial cannula, and arterial cannulation is in the ascending
                               aorta. Some circuits do not incorporate a membrane recirculation line; in these cases,
                               the cardioplegia blood source is a separate outlet connector built into the oxygenator
                               near the arterial outlet. The systemic blood pump may be either a roller or centrifugal
                               type. The cardioplegia delivery system (right) is a one-pass combination blood/
                               crystalloid type. The cooler-heater water source may be operated to supply water to
                               both the oxygenator heat exchanger and cardioplegia delivery system. The air bubble
                               detector sensor may be placed on the line between the venous reservoir and systemic
                               pump, between the pump and membrane oxygenator inlet, or between the oxygenator
                               outlet and arterial filter (neither shown), or on the line after the arterial filter (optional
                               position on drawing). One-way valves prevent retrograde flow (some circuits with
                               a centrifugal pump also incorporate a one-way valve after the pump and within the
                               systemic flow line). Other safety devices include an oxygen analyzer placed between
                               the anesthetic vaporizer (if used) and the oxygenator gas inlet and a reservoir level
                               sensor attached to the housing of the hard-shell venous reservoir (on the left center).
                               Arrows, directions of flow; X, placement of tubing clamps; P and T (within circles),
                               pressure and temperature sensors. Hemoconcentrator (described in text) not shown.

===== PAGE 350 =====
350    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                        Figure 6.1-2. Schematic representation of the CPB circuit. (Reproduced with
                                        permission from Hardy JD: Hardy's Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott,
                                        Philadelphia: 1988.)

                             during the physical act of chest closure, where a transient rise in intramediastinal pressure may depress systemic
                             venous return. Similarly, decreased pulmonary compliance and gas exchange mandate vigilance over inspiratory
                             pressures and lung volumes during chest closure because mediastinal volume is physically decreased.

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR CARDIOPULMONARY
                                      BYPASS (CPB)
                             This segment is not meant to be a definitive text on CPB, but rather a guide to the anesthetic management of bypass.
                             Communication among surgeons, anesthesiologists, and pump technicians is of vital importance in carrying out this
                             procedure.

                               ■■ PREPARATION FOR BYPASS
                               Prebypass/              3 baseline ACT (normal = 90–130 sec). Heparin (3 mg [~300 U]/kg) is administered via a
                                 anticoagulation       central vein (3 back-bleeding to verify intravascular position) or by the surgeon directly into the
                                                       atrium (preferred). 3 ACT 3 min after heparin. It is essential to ensure adequate anticoagulation
                                                       (ACT > 400 sec).

                               Aortic cannulation      Control MAP to ~70 mm Hg for cannulation to ensure that the aortotomy does not extend. If
                                                       needed, vasodilators may be used. The arterial line should be inspected for air bubbles.

                               Venous cannulation      Venous cannulation may be associated with atrial dysrhythmias. Blood loss can be excessive.
                                                       Be prepared to infuse volume boluses, if necessary.

                               Pupils                  Assess pupil symmetry for later comparison.

===== PAGE 351 =====
Cardiopulmonary Bypass        351

                     ■■ TRANSITION ONTO CPB
                     Stop ventilation         Commencing bypass is a dangerous period for the patient as a result of the many hemodynamic
                                              changes that occur. D/C ventilation once there is no pulmonary blood flow.

                     Withdraw PA              Withdraw PA catheter 4–5 cm.
                       catheter

                     Stop infusions           Stop iv drugs and reduce iv fluid infusions to TKO.

                     Anticoagulation          ACT should be re-3’d after 5 min on CPB to ensure anticoagulation (ACT > 400 sec).

                     Oxygenation              Verify oxygenation by checking arterial inflow color and inline sensors and by ABG within 5 min
                                              of beginning CPB.

                     Flow                     3 for adequate venous drainage (CVP falls to a low level). Ensure adequate arterial inflow. Initial
                                              pressures may be very low, but usually will increase. View the descending thoracic aorta on TEE
                                              to verify flow (no aortic dissection).

                     Anesthesia               Anesthetics (e.g., fentanyl and midazolam) may be needed. A repeat dose (e.g., 10 mg pan-
                                              curonium or 50 mg of rocuronium) should be given to prevent movement or shivering (increases
                                              O2 requirements).

                     Pupils                   Assess pupils. Unilateral dilation may indicate arterial inflow into the innominate artery (unilateral

                                                                                                                                                               Cardiovascular
                                              carotid perfusion).

                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                     ■■ BYPASS PERIOD
                     Anticoagulation          ACT levels should be checked regularly (q 20–30 min) and kept at > 400. Add heparin (5000–
                                              10,000 U), if needed.

                     Pressure/flow            There is controversy about safe flows and pressures. Generally, flows of 1.2–3 L/m2/min are
                                              used, with pressures of 30–80 mm Hg. A MAP of 50–60 mm Hg is probably best for cerebral
                                              perfusion and does not result in excessive noncoronary blood flow.

                     Acid-base status         α-stat (ABG measured and interpreted at 37°, regardless of actual patient temperature) regula-
                                              tion of acid-base status is preferred because of maintenance of normal cerebral flow and auto-
                                              regulation on CPB.

                     Hct/Electrolytes         Generally, Hct will fall to ~20, which may be acceptable (however, Hct ≥ 25 is preferable) in
                                              most patients. Hypokalemia is common and should be corrected. A K+ ~4.5 mEq/L is desirable.
                                              Blood glucose levels should be monitored q 1 h. Treat blood glucose ↑ 125 mg/dl with iv regular
                                              insulin. (See Table 6.1-2.)

                     UO                       Keep UO >1 mL/kg/h. If needed, mannitol and/or furosemide should be given (assuming pump
                                              flow is adequate).

                     Temperature              During bypass, T is usually maintained at ~28°C.

                    Table 6.1-1. Difference Between α-Stat and pH-Stat Management During CPB
                    a–Stat (Temperature-uncorrected)                                 pH Stat (Temperature-corrected)
                    Plasma pH maintained at 7.4 (when measured at 37°C).             Plasma pH maintained at 7.4 at actual patient temperature.
                    Arterial PCO2 maintained at 40 mm Hg (when measured at           Arterial PCO2 maintained at 40 mm Hg at actual patient tem-
                    37°C).                                                           perature. Requires addition of CO2 to inspired gases
                    Relative respiratory alkalosis during hypothermia                Relative normocapnia during hypothermia
                    Cerebral autoregulation preserved—CBF maintained.                Results in loss of cerebral autoregulation.

===== PAGE 352 =====
352    c h a p t e r 6.1             Cardiac Surgery

                               Table 6.1-2. Continuous Insulin Infusion in Intraoperative Adult Cardiac Surgery Patients
                               1.     Bolus and start infusion pump as follows:

                                      Blood Glucose            Insulin Bolus units        Insulin Drip units/h
                                      < 125                    0                          0
                                      125–175                  5                          1
                                      175–225                  10                         2
                                      > 225                    15                         3
                               2.     Frequency of blood glucose determination: every 30 min intraoperatively!
                               3.     Insulin titration:

                                      Blood Glucose Action
                                      < 75	Stop insulin; give D50w and recheck blood glucose in 30 min. When blood glucose > 150,
                                                    restart with rate 50% of previous rate.
                                      75–100	Stop insulin; recheck blood glucose in 30 min. When blood glucose > 150, restart with rate
                                                    50% of previous rate, unless the dose is < 0.25 U/h.
                                      101–125	If < 10% lower than last test, decrease rate by 0.5 U/h.
                                                    If > 10% lower than last test, decrease rate by 50%. If neither, continue current rate.
                                      126–175       Same rate
                                      176–225	If lower than last test—same rate.
                                                    If higher than last test—increase rate by 0.5 U/h.
     Cardiovascular

                                      > 225	If > 19% lower than last test— same rate. If < 10% lower than last test OR if higher than last
        Surgery

                                                    test increase rate by 1 U/h. If blood glucose > 225 and has not decreased after the third hourly
                                                    increase in insulin, then double the insulin rate.

                               ■■ TERMINATION OF BYPASS
                               Rewarming                       Prior to discontinuing CPB, the patient should have a core temperature of at least 36°C.

                               Anesthesia/                     Patient awareness may be a problem during rewarming. Volatile agents ± benzodiazepine
                                 relaxation                    (e.g., midazolam 3–5 mg) ± a narcotic to prevent awareness. In addition, a muscle relaxant also
                                                               should be given.

                               Acid-base/                      3 electrolytes, acid-base status, and Hct. Correct acidosis. K+: 4.5–5.5, normal ionized Ca++,
                                 electrolytes/Hct              and Hct ≥ 20 should be ensured.

                               Air maneuvers                   Air maneuvers (to remove intracardiac and intraaortic air) are carried out when the heart is
                                                               opened. Ventilation is commenced after there is pulmonary blood flow and will aid in the evacua-
                                                               tion of air. Pleural fluid should be removed.

                               ■■ WEANING FROM BYPASS
                               Prior to weaning                Prior to weaning from CPB, the aortic cross-clamp should have been off for 30 min to allow
                                                               rewarming and reperfusion of the heart. Defibrillation is often needed, and pacing may be
                                                               required. NSR or AV pacing is preferred. Vasoactive drugs should be available. After normal T,
                                                               ventilation, cardiac rhythm, and reperfusion are established, bypass may be terminated. The
                                                               heart is gradually volume-loaded (transfused from oxygenator) to adequate filling pressures and
                                                               bypass flow slowly decreased over 15–45 sec until it is off. Return to bypass in the event of
                                                               progressive cardiac distension or dysfunction. Assess CO and BP and adjust vascular resistance
                                                               as necessary. Inotropic agents often are required at this stage.

                               Reversal of                     After the patient is off CPB, anticoagulation must be reversed with protamine (1–1.3 mg/100 U
                                 anticoagulation               heparin), administered slowly over 10–20 min because rapid administration can be associated with
                                                               ↓ BP (treat with volume, calcium, α-agonists as necessary). Other reactions include pulmonary HTN
                                                               and true allergic reactions. 3 ACT to ensure that it has returned to control (90–130 sec).

                               BP management                   Vasoactive support often is needed in the postbypass period; the need varies with surgical pro-
                                                               cedure, disease process, and underlying cardiac function. In general, SBP should be limited to
                                                               120 mm Hg to avoid stress on the aortotomy site.

===== PAGE 353 =====
Cardiopulmonary Bypass       353

                     ■■ COAGULATION AND CPB
                     General                       Bleeding is common post-CPB and may be considerable. Both preop and intraop factors contrib-
                                                   ute to this. Knowledge of these factors and the tests involved will aid with the management of
                                                   these patients (Table 6.1-3).

                     Preop factors                 Hx of previous bleeding during surgery is important. Many drugs may contribute to bleeding:
                                                   aspirin/NSAIDs/clopidogrel (Plt dysfunction), anticoagulants (heparin, Coumadin) and fibri-
                                                   nolytic agents. These should be stopped preop, if possible, or their action reversed. Other
                                                   pathological processes (e.g., liver failure/congestion, renal failure, or hemophilia) also play a
                                                   role. Preop testing is important and should include PT, PTT, Plt count, and bleeding time, as a
                                                   minimum.

                     Intraop factors               CPB is associated with ↓ Plt count and function. Circulating clotting factors are decreased, and
                                                   fibrinolysis occurs. Many surgical teams routinely use either Amicar (5–10 g loading dose; 1 g/h,
                                                   maintenance) or Aprotinin (1 mL, test dose; 1–2 million KIU, loading; 0.25–0.5 million KIU/h, main-
                                                   tenance) prophylactically during cardiac surgery to inhibit the fibrinolytic process. Aprotinin also
                                                   has anti-inflammatory properties that may offset the inflammatory response to CPB. Recent stud-
                                                   ies have associated aprotinin (and not aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid) with increased risk
                                                   of CV events, including MI and heart failure, cerebrovascular events and renal dysfunction/failure
                                                   in patients undergoing CABG surgery.

                     Post-CPB bleeding             The common causes of post-CPB bleeding are surgical causes, inadequate heparin reversal,

                                                                                                                                                                  Cardiovascular
                                                   ↓ number of Plt and Plt dysfunction, ↓ clotting factors, fibrinolysis, DIC, excessive BP,

                                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                                                   and hypothermia. Surgical causes and inadequate heparin reversal (3 ACT) should be
                                                   ruled out. If no surgical cause is found and ACT is normal, Plt (1–2 plateletpheresis units)
                                                   should be infused. PT, PTT, Plt count, TT, reptilase time, fibrinogen, and FSP should be
                                                   checked. TEG may prove very useful. (See Fig 7.12-9 and Table 7.12-3 in Liver/Kidney
                                                   Transplantation, p. 717.)

                    Table 6.1-3. A Treatment Plan for Excessive Bleeding after Cardiac Surgery
                    Action                                         Dosage                                      Indication
                    Rule out surgical cause                        —                                           Absence of oozing at puncture sites
                                                                                                               and incision
                    More protamine                                 0.5–1 mg/kg                                 ACT > 150 sec or aPTT > 1.5 times
                                                                                                               control
                    Warm the patient                               —                                           “Core” temperature < 35°C
                    Apply positive end-expiratory pressure         5–10 cm H2O
                    (PEEP)*                                        0.3 mcg/kg iv                               Prolonged bleeding time
                    Desmopressin
                    Aminocaproic acid                              50 mg/kg, then 25 mg/kg/h                   Elevated D-dimer or teardrop shaped
                                                                                                               TEG tracing
                    Tranexamic acid                                10 mg/kg, then 1 mg/kg/h                    Elevated D-dimer or teardrop shaped
                                                                                                               TEG tracing
                    Platelet transfusion                           1 U/10 kg                                   Platelet count < 100,000/mm3
                    Fresh frozen plasma                            15 mL/kg                                    PT or aPTT > 1.5 times control
                    Cryoprecipitate                                1 U/4 kg                                    Fibrinogen < 1 g/L or 100 mg/dL
                    * PEEP is contraindicated in hypovolemia.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Conlon N, Grocott HP, Mackensen GB: Neuroprotection during cardiac surgery. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther 2008; 6(4):503–20.
                     2. De Somer F: What is optimal flow and how to validate this? J Extra Corpor Technol 2007; 39(4):278–80.
                     3. Entwistle JWC III, Boateng P, Wechsler AS: Intraoperative myocardial protection. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP,
                        eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 648–67.
                     4. Gibbs NM, Larach DR: Anesthetic management during cardiopulmonary bypass. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP,
                        eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 214–37.
                     5. Hessell EA II, Murphy GS, Groom RC et al: Cardiopulmonary bypass: equipment, circuits, and pathophysiology. In: Hensley
                        FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
                        2012, 587–629.

===== PAGE 354 =====
354    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                                6. Mangano DT, Tudor IC, Dietzel C, et al: The risk associated with aprotinin in cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2006; 336(4):353–65.
                                7. Morris BN, Romanoff ME, Royster RL. The postcardiopulmonary bypass period. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds.
                                   A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 238–64.
                                8. Shore-Lesserson L, Malayaman SN, Harrow JC et al: Coagulation management during and after cardiopulmonary bypass. In:
                                   Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                   Wilkins: 2012, 548–70.

                             CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFT SURGERY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is the most frequently performed cardiac operation. Since
                             the discovery that coronary thrombosis is the causative event for MI, many schemes have been devised to augment
                             the restricted coronary blood flow, including collateral pericardial blood flow to epicardial arteries and implantation
                             of the internal mammary artery (IMA) with unligated side branches into the LV muscle. With the discovery by Fava-
                             laro that saphenous veins can be anastomosed to the epicardial coronary arteries, a new era of myocardial revascu-
                             larization began. Basically, the technique involves bypass to a narrowed or occluded epicardial coronary > 1 mm in
     Cardiovascular

                             diameter with a small-diameter conduit (usually reversed saphenous vein or IMA) distal to the narrowed segment,
        Surgery

                             with the proximal arterial inflow source being the ascending aorta. The IMA may be mobilized from the chest wall,
                             leaving its proximal origin with the subclavian artery intact (pedicled graft), or the IMA may be transected and its
                             proximal end anastomosed to the aorta or saphenous vein as a “free mammary graft.” An “all-arterial revasculariza-
                             tion,” using the right IMA and nondominant RA, is being utilized with increasing frequency.

                                         Figure 6.1-3. Coronary artery circulation—anterior view. (Reproduced with
                                         permission from Edwards EA, Malone PD, Collins JJ Jr: Operative Anatomy of the
                                         Thorax. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia: 1972.)

===== PAGE 355 =====
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery         355

                   The heart is approached through a median sternotomy, with the patient supported on full CPB (see separate sec-
                   tion on CPB, p. 348). Although various operative strategies may be used, the most common regimen is for all distal
                   (epicardial) anastomoses to be performed during a single period of aortic cross-clamping and cardiac arrest. Dur-
                   ing that period of induced asystole, myocardial protection is achieved by hypothermia and occasional reperfusion
                   via antegrade or retrograde cardioplegia. Cardiac standstill and a bloodless field are mandatory to allow these very
                   demanding small-diameter anastomoses to be constructed, with no obstruction to flow, in a minimal amount of time.
                   The cross-clamp is then removed and the heart allowed to resume beating. A partially occluding aortic cross-clamp
                   can then be applied to allow construction of the proximal aortic anastomoses. After a sufficient period of resuscita-
                   tion, the patient is weaned from CPB, and decannulation, heparin reversal, and chest closure are allowed to proceed
                   as previously noted.
                   The choice of conduit depends on availability and durability. Historically, the saphenous vein was the first small
                   vessel conduit with acceptable patencies but with prolonged experience, it appears that 50% of vein grafts will be
                   significantly diseased or occluded at 10 yr. The IMA appears to have superior long-term performance with ~90%
                   10-yr patency rates. Other arterial conduits, such as the left gastroepiploic artery, superficial epigastric artery, and
                   the radial artery, are being investigated as to their long- and short-term durability. Typical target arteries include the
                   distal right coronary and its major terminal branch, the posterior descending artery. From the left circulation, the
                   left anterior descending (LAD), with its diagonal and septal branches, is the most important, having been estimated
                   to supply blood to 60% of the left ventricle.
                   The left circumflex coronary artery courses in the posterior atrioventricular groove and is not easily accessible for

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                   bypass, which is usually performed to its obtuse marginal or posterolateral branches.

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                   In a randomized study on coronary artery surgery (CASS), coronary bypass was noted to be superior to medical manage-
                   ment for relief of angina and to prolong life in patients with left main CAD and in those with three-vessel disease and
                   impaired LV function. Other patients may receive bypass for intractable angina refractory to medical management.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: port access coronary artery revascularization (see p. 389); off-pump and
                   minimally invasive coronary artery bypass (see p. 389).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: CAD with Class 3 or 4 angina (angina with minimal exertion or at rest)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Median sternotomy with legs prepped for saphenous vein harvest

                     Special                 Complete hemodynamic monitoring; TEE
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  CPB
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h

                     Surgical time           3.5–4.5 h

                     Closing                 Prevention of coagulopathy; maintenance of preload
                       considerations

                     EBL                     500–600 mL

                     Postop care             ICU: 1–3 d, intubated 6–24 h.

                     Mortality               2–4%

                     Morbidity               Cognitive decline in patients > 60 yr: 26%
                                             MI: 3–6%
                                             Pneumonia: 5%
                                             CVA/stroke: 2–4%
                                             ↓ renal function

                     Pain score              7–8

===== PAGE 356 =====
356    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range             60–80 yr (mean = 74 yr)

                               Male:Female           2:1

                               Incidence             Common

                               Etiology              Coronary atherosclerosis

                               Associated            LV failure; pulmonary HTN; ischemic mitral regurgitation; diabetes mellitus; obstructive pulmo-
                                 conditions          nary disease

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             (Procedures covered: CABG; LV aneurysmectomy)

                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             H&P and tests will divide these patients broadly into two groups: (a) high-risk, characterized by poor LV function
                             (cardiac failure; EF < 40%; LVEDP > 18 mm Hg; CI < 2.0 L/min/m2; ventricular dyskinesia; three-vessel disease;
                             occlusion of left main or left main equivalent; valvular disease; recent MI; ventricular aneurysm; VSD; MI in prog-
     Cardiovascular

                             ress; and old age); and (b) low-risk, characterized by good LV function. The type of monitoring chosen will depend
        Surgery

                             on the patient’s group.

                              Respiratory             Hx of smoking or COPD—patient should be encouraged to stop smoking at least 2 wk
                                                      before surgery. Treat COPD and optimize therapy before surgery.
                                                      Tests: CXR; PFTs; as indicated by H&P

                              Cardiovascular          In the preop assessment, the following factors will affect patient management and surgical
                                                      outcome:
                                                      • Hx of angina (stable, unstable at rest, and precipitating factors)
                                                      • Patient’s exercise tolerance will provide a clue to LV functions and surgical outcome.
                                                      • The presence of CHF (Sx: SOB, PND, orthopnea, DOE, pulmonary edema, JVD, 3rd-
                                                         heart sound).
                                                      • Recent (< 6 mo) MI, dysrhythmias, HTN, vascular disease (particularly carotid stenosis,
                                                         aortic disease).
                                                      • Valvular disease (particularly MR or AS) or the presence of a VSD or LV aneurysm may
                                                         portend increased risk of periop complications.
                                                      Tests: 12-lead ECG: 3 ischemia (area involved), LVH, previous MI, dysrhythmias. Exercise
                                                      stress testing: 3 exercise tolerance, area of ischemia, maximal HR and BP before ischemia
                                                      occurs, dysrhythmias. Thallium scan: 3 component of reversible ischemia. ECHO (may be
                                                      combined with stress ECHO): 3 LV function, wall motion abnormalities, valvular disease,
                                                      VSD. Cardiac catheterization: 3 extent and location of disease, LV function, valvular pa-
                                                      thology, VSD, LVEDP, LV aneurysm.

                              Postinfarction          The development of a postinfarction VSD is associated with high operative morbidity and
                                VSD                   mortality because of the difficulty in repairing the lesion due to friable tissue, difficulty in ob-
                                                      taining hemostasis, emergent nature of the condition, and possible pulmonary edema. These
                                                      patients effectively have poor LV function and should be considered as high-risk patients.
                                                      They often require support, including IABP, during induction, prebypass, and postbypass.

                              LV aneurysm             LV aneurysm is usually a late complication of infarction; however, it can occur early, when
                                                      it usually is associated with cardiac rupture (and high mortality). These patients usually
                                                      have poor myocardial function and should be anesthetized with full monitoring, includ-
                                                      ing PA catheterization. Postbypass, the LV cavity is reduced in size and compliance. To
                                                      ensure an adequate CO, maintain adequate preload, a higher than normal HR (A-V pacing
                                                      if needed), and sinus rhythm, and consider the use of inotropes. LV aneurysms are often
                                                      associated with dysrhythmias and may require cardiac mapping. Hemostasis is often dif-
                                                      ficult to obtain, and adequate iv access is a necessity. Treatment usually entails the use of
                                                      blood and blood products.

===== PAGE 357 =====
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery         357

                    Emergency                 Emergency revascularization occurs in the setting of acute MI, often with acute LV fail-
                      revasculariza-          ure or after failed PTCA, where the patient may be stable, suffering from acute ischemia
                      tion                    and hemodynamically unstable, or even in full cardiac arrest. Factors to consider in these
                                              cases are full stomach (and the need for rapid-sequence induction [p. B-5] in the face of
                                              ischemia); the prior use of fibrinolytic agents (with increased risk of hemorrhage); need for
                                              inotropes; antianginals; IABP; and dysrhythmias. These patients have a higher morbidity
                                              and mortality. In patients who have received fibrinolytic agents, consider postbypass use of
                                              antifibrinolytic agents (e.g., aminocaproic acid).

                    Neurological              Previous stroke or Hx/Sx of carotid artery disease should be documented and evaluated.

                    Endocrine                 Diabetes is common and periop control of blood glucose is important.
                                              Tests: Blood glucose

                    Renal                     3 baseline renal function, as CPB places these patients at risk for renal failure.
                                              Tests: Cr; BUN; electrolytes (particularly K+)

                    Hematologic               Patients are often on aspirin or other antiplatelet therapy, which may lead to increased
                                              intraop hemorrhage. These agents should be stopped 7–10 d before surgery, if possible.
                                              Some patients may be on anticoagulants (usually heparin in the immediate preop period).
                                              Heparin should be stopped 6–8 h preop; however, in some patients, heparin infusion is

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                              continued into the OR. Other patients may have received thrombolytic agents that put

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                              them at increased risk for intraop hemorrhage.
                                              Tests: Consider Plt count, PTT, if indicated.

                    Laboratory                Hb/Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P. T&C 2–4 U PRBCs.

                    Premedication             Patients should be instructed to continue all medications (e.g., nitrates, β-blockers; Ca++
                                              antagonists, antidysrhythmics, and antihypertensives) before surgery, with the exception
                                              of diuretics on the day of surgery. Allaying anxiety may decrease the incidence of periop
                                              ischemia and help with the preinduction placement of lines. If necessary, preop sedation
                                              may include diazepam (10 mg po) or lorazepam (1–2 mg po) the night before and again
                                              1–2 h before arrival in the OR with the addition of morphine (0.1 mg/kg im) and scopol-
                                              amine (0.3 mg im). Most often midazolam (1–5 mg iv) immediately prior to OR is used.
                                              Severely compromised patients will require less premedication.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                   induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be critical in the care of these patients, especially during
                   induction. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it is
                   not essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the CVP
                   catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv.

                    Induction                 Generally, a moderate- to high-dose narcotic technique (e.g., fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg or
                                              sufentanil 2.5–20 mcg/kg), supplemented by etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) or midazolam
                                              (50–350 mcg/kg), is appropriate. As with all cardiac cases, the speed of induction and
                                              total drug dose depend on the patient’s cardiac function and pathology. Muscle relaxation
                                              may be obtained using pancuronium (0.1 mg/kg), given slowly to avoid tachycardia, or
                                              vecuronium (possibility of bradycardia, especially if the patient is β-blocked). It is impor-
                                              tant to avoid the sympathetic response to laryngoscopy. The use of high-dose narcotics (see
                                              above), esmolol (100–500 mcg/kg over 1 min, followed by 40–100 mcg/kg/min infusion),
                                              SNP (0.5–3 mcg/kg/min), lidocaine (1–2 mg/kg), or a combination of these agents, may
                                              decrease or ablate this response. NTG (0.5–2 mcg/kg/min) also may be used during induc-
                                              tion if evidence of ischemia occurs.

                    Maintenance               Usually narcotic (total: fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg or sufentanil 5–20 mcg/kg) with midazolam
                                              (50–350 mcg/kg) for amnesia. Patients with good LV function may benefit from the decreased
                                              myocardial O2 demand associated with the use of volatile agents (2° ↓ contractility). N2O is
                                              generally avoided. Propofol infusion may be used while rewarming and postbypass.

===== PAGE 358 =====
358    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                              Emergence               Transported to ICU, sedated, intubated, and ventilated. Extubate when able—often < 6 h if
                                                      lower-dose narcotic technique used (fast-track).

                              Blood and fluid         IV: 14 ga × 1–2
                                 requirements         NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h
                                                      UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h
                                                      Warm all fluids.
                                                      Humidify gases.

                              Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1)            Standard monitors and an A-line are placed before
                                                                                            induction.
                                                      Arterial line                         3 BP in both arms. Right radial preferred if left
                                                                                            IMA graft, because retraction of the sternum may
                                                                                            compress the left subclavian.
                                                      CVP or PA catheter                    CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usually is placed
                                                                                            after intubation. In the low-risk/good LV func-
                                                                                            tion group, CVP is adequate; in high-risk/poor LV
                                                                                            function, a PA catheter is useful for hemodynamic
                                                                                            monitoring, weaning from bypass, and vasoactive
                                                                                            therapy. Some groups use routine PA catheteriza-
                                                                                            tion for all patients undergoing CABG surgery.
     Cardiovascular

                                                      ECG                                   Five-lead monitoring using leads II and V5 (or area
        Surgery

                                                                                            most at risk for ischemia).
                                                      TEE                                   Will reflect regional wall motion abnormalities,
                                                                                            papillary muscle dysfunction, and MR.

                              Myocardial O2           Supply—Coronary blood flow:           The balance of myocardial O2 supply vs demand
                                balance                 Perfusion pressure (DBP-LVEDP)      is important in the management of these patients.
                                                        Diastolic filling time (HR) blood   The goal of anesthesia is to ensure that this bal-
                                                        viscosity (optimal Hct = 30)        ance remains in equilibrium and that no ischemia
                                                      Coronary vasoconstriction:            occurs, or, if it does, that it is treated promptly.
                                                        Spasm                               Those patients with poor LV function or compli-
                                                        PaCO2 (hypocapnia                   cated disease will benefit from maintenance of
                                                        →constriction) a-sympathetic        contractility (avoid volatile agents) and a high FiO2,
                                                        activity                            whereas those with good LV function may benefit
                                                      Supply—O2 delivery:                   from mild cardiac depression (↓ demand associated
                                                        O2 sat                              with the addition of low-dose volatile agents). Cer-
                                                        Hct                                 tain events are associated with increased risk of
                                                        Oxyhemoglobin dissociation          intraop ischemia: intubation, incision, sternotomy,
                                                        curve                               cannulation, tachycardia, ↑ BP or ↓ BP, ventricular
                                                      Demand—O2 consumption:                fibrillation or distension, inadequate cardioplegia,
                                                        BP (afterload)                      emboli, spasm, or inadequate revascularization.
                                                        Ventricular volume (preload)        Care should be taken to avoid these complications
                                                        Wall thickness (↓ subendocardial    and to ablate responses to stimuli.
                                                        perfusion)
                                                        HR
                                                        Contractility

                              Detection of            ECG                                   ST segment depression or elevation or a new
                                ischemia                                                    T-wave alteration may suggest ischemia. Monitor-
                                                                                            ing two leads—one lateral (e.g., V5) and one inferior
                                                                                            (e.g., II)—gives the best detection rate.
                                                      PA catheter                           Elevations of PCWP may be indicative of ischemia.
                                                                                            A new V-wave on the PCWP trace is a better sign
                                                                                            of possible ischemia (papillary muscle dysfunction).
                                                      TEE                                   The appearance of a new regional wall motion
                                                                                            abnormality is the most sensitive indicator of isch-
                                                                                            emia, but it requires constant monitoring.

===== PAGE 359 =====
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery            359

                    Treatment of               Caused by tachycardia:                      Although avoidance of ischemia is the goal, when it
                       ischemia                  Esmolol (100–500 mcg/kg)                  does occur it should be treated aggressively. Treat-
                                                 ↑ anesthesia                              ment may include inotropic support (e.g., dopamine
                                                 Verapamil (2.5–10 mg iv)                  1–5 mcg/kg/min, epinephrine 25–150 ng/kg/min or
                                               Caused by ↑ BP:                             milrinone 0.375–0.75 mcg/kg/min). If LV failure per-
                                                 NTG (0.5–4 mcg/kg/min)                    sists despite other therapy, an IABP or VAD may be
                                                 ↑ anesthesia                              inserted.
                                               Caused by ↓ BP:
                                                Phenylephrine (0.2–0.75 mcg/
                                                 kg/min)
                                                 ↑ preload
                                               Caused by ↓ ↓ HR:
                                                 A-V pacing

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications              Infarction                                   Postop control of ischemia is important because

                                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                                               Ischemia                                     hemodynamic instability may be associated with

                                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                               Tamponade                                    inadequate pain relief, awakening, and ventilation.
                                               Dysrhythmias
                                               Cardiac failure
                                               Coagulopathy
                                               Hemorrhage

                    Pain management            Parenteral opioids                           Supplement with benzodiazepine for sedation.

                    Tests                      ECG
                                               CPK
                                               CXR
                                               Electrolytes
                                               ABG
                                               Coag profiles

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Anesthesia for myocardial revascularization. In: Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell
                        Science, Boston: 2008, Chapter 4.
                     2. Green MS, Okum GS, Harrow JC: Anesthetic management of myocardial revascularization. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE,
                        Gravlee GP, eds: A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 293–318.
                     3. Moller JT, Cluitmans P, Rasmussen LS, et al: Long-term postoperative cognitive dysfunction in the elderly ISPOCD1 study.
                        International Study of Post-Operative Cognitive Dysfunction. Lancet 1998; 351(9119):1888–9.
                     4. Munsch C: What cardiology trainees should know about coronary artery surgery—and coronary artery surgeons: ischaemic
                        heart disease? Heart 2008; 94(2):230–6.
                     5. Myles PS, McIlroy D: Fast-track cardiac anesthesia: choice of anesthetic agents and techniques. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc
                        Anesth 2005; 9(1):5–16.
                     6. Okum G, Horrow JC: Anesthetic management of myocardial revascularization. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds:
                        A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 289–315.
                     7. Roach GW, Kanchuger M, Mangano CM, et al: Adverse cerebral outcomes after coronary bypass surgery. Multicenter Study
                        of Perioperative Ischemia Research Group and Ischemia Research and Education Foundation Investigators. N Engl J Med
                        1996; 335(25):1857–63.
                     8. Rogers WJ, Coggin CJ, Green B, et al: 10-year followup of quality of life in patients randomized to receive medical treatment
                        or coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Circulation 1990; 82(5):1647–58.

===== PAGE 360 =====
360    c h a p t e r 6.1    Cardiac Surgery

                             LEFT VENTRICULAR ANEURYSMECTOMY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Extensive MI may → large areas of myocardial necrosis, with subsequent aneurysm formation. LV
                             failure may ensue as a result of continuous LV dilatation or mitral insufficiency 2° annular dilatation or involvement
                             of papillary muscles. Indications for this surgery include worsening CHF and increased dysrhythmias.
                             Typically, apical dilatation with maintenance of basilar myocardial contractility allows for aneurysm resection and pres-
                             ervation of both myocardial contractility and chamber size to produce an adequate CO. Operation is commenced
                             in the usual manner—by establishing CPB (see p. 348), cross-clamping the aorta, establishing myocardial protection,
                             and then assessing the left ventricle. A thinned, dilated ventricular segment with full-thickness scar formation can be
                             resected and ventricular continuity restored with improvement of ventricular geometry and myocardial energy
                             demands. Coronary bypass can be performed during this same period. Then air is removed from the left side of the
                             heart, the cross-clamp is removed, and coronary perfusion is reestablished. After a sufficient period of resuscitation and
                             return of vigorous contractility, bypass is D/C’d, not infrequently with the assistance of intraaortic balloon pump (IABP)
                             to augment forward output. Decannulation, protamine administration, and closure proceed as described in CPB, p. 348.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: LV aneurysm with CHF
     Cardiovascular

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
        Surgery

                               Position                Supine

                               Incision                Median sternotomy, ± leg incision for saphenous vein harvest if coronary
                                                       bypass is planned.

                               Unique                  Preparations (ECG leads) should be made for pre- or postop IABP or LV assist
                                 considerations        device (LVAD)

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h

                               Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 40–100 min
                                                       CPB: 70–130 min
                                                       Total: 3–4 h

                               EBL                     300–400 mL

                               Postop care             ICU × 1–3 d, intubated 6–24 h; usually requires inotropic support ± mechani-
                                                       cal support (LVAD, IABP).

                               Mortality               5–7%

                               Morbidity               Overall: 8–10%
                                                       Requirement for IABP: 10%
                                                       Respiratory insufficiency: 5%
                                                       CVA: 2–3%

                               Pain score              7–10

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               50–70 yr

                               Male:Female             3:1

                               Incidence               Uncommon

                               Etiology                Usually the end result of MI 2° CAD

                               Associated              Mitral insufficiency; pulmonary HTN; CAD
                                 conditions

===== PAGE 361 =====
Aortic Valve Replacement        361

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, p. 356.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Mills NL, Everson CT, Hockmuth DR: Technical advances in the treatment of left ventricular aneurysm. Ann Thorac Surg
                        1993; 55:792–800.
                     2. Ohara K: Current surgical strategy for post-infarction left ventricular aneurysm—from linear aneurysmectomy to Dor’s
                        operation. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2000; 6(5):289–94.
                     3. Sun B, Gravlee GP: Surgical ventricular restoration and remodeling. In: Hensley FA, ed. A Practical Approach to Cardiac
                        Anesthesia, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, Chapter 17.

                   AORTIC VALVE REPLACEMENT
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Disease of the aortic valve may present as valvular stenosis, insufficiency, or a combination of the two.
                   Valvular disease most commonly occurs as a result of rheumatic disease, but also may occur 2° calcific degeneration
                   (aortic sclerosis) in the elderly. Congenitally bicuspid valves and endocarditis account for most of the remainder.

                                                                                                                                                          Cardiovascular
                   Repair of the aortic valve is rarely possible, and most conditions require valve replacement. The three most com-

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                   monly used prostheses are: porcine bioprostheses, especially in the older patient; mechanical prostheses with the
                   necessity for lifelong anticoagulation; and cryopreserved homografts, which, unfortunately, are expensive and in
                   short supply. The operation, on full CPB, usually is performed through a median sternotomy. After routine bicaval
                   and aortic cannulation, the patient is taken onto full CPB. Left heart drainage is through a pulmonary artery vent,
                   and a left atrial vent usually is inserted through the right superior pulmonary vein. Because of the LV hypertrophy,
                   myocardial protection is of utmost importance. Most centers favor hyperkalemic, hypothermic cardioplegic arrest,
                   augmented by topical cooling, using either a continuous infusion of cold saline into the pericardial well or a cooling
                   jacket. Cardioplegic administration can be achieved either antegrade into the coronary ostia or retrograde via the
                   coronary sinus. Myocardial temperature is monitored continuously.
                   After the heart is arrested, the aorta is opened to expose the aortic valve. Continuous insufflation of the operative
                   field with CO2 reduces the amount of dislodged or trapped air. The rheumatic, stenotic valve, including aortic an-
                   nulus, is frequently heavily calcified, and all Ca++ must be debrided to allow the prosthetic valve to be securely seated.
                   This is frequently a tedious and time-consuming procedure, but one that then allows the remainder of the procedure
                   to proceed in a timely fashion. After excision of the valve leaflets and debridement of the annulus, ensuring that
                   no particulate debris embolizes into the ventricle or coronary arteries, the annulus is measured to ensure a proper
                   match between prosthetic valve and annulus, and an appropriate valve prosthesis is selected. Interrupted sutures are
                   placed through the annulus for its entire circumference and then passed through the sewing ring of the prosthesis.
                   The prosthesis is lowered into the annulus and securely tied in place. Proper sizing and positioning are mandatory
                   to prevent perivalve leaks or impingement on the coronary ostia. Systemic rewarming is initiated during the final
                   stages of the valve implantation, and the LV is allowed to fill during aortic closure. With the patient in the head-down
                   position, all remaining air is vented from the left heart and aorta, and the cross-clamp is removed to allow myocar-
                   dial perfusion. The heart is allowed to recover from this period of ischemia, and after sufficient resuscitation, with
                   continuous venting of air from the aorta, the patient is weaned from CPB. Vasodilators are almost always utilized, as
                   there appears to be excessive vasospasm present in both the coronary and pulmonary circulations after hypothermia.
                   Decannulation and heparin reversal with protamine are then accomplished in the routine manner.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Severe AS with syncope, chest pain or CHF; aortic insufficiency with CHF

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Valve Replacement with Prosthesis                 Homograft Valve Replacement

                     Position                Supine                                            ⇐

                     Incision                Median sternotomy                                 ⇐

                     Special                 TEE; hemodynamic monitoring; CPB                  TEE or surface ECHO
                       instrumentation

===== PAGE 362 =====
362    c h a p t e r 6.1    Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                       Valve Replacement with Prosthesis                  Homograft Valve Replacement

                               Unique                  ECHO assessment of valve function and regional ECHO assessment of annular size and intraop
                                 considerations        wall motion intraop                            evaluation of valve function after implantation

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision and 1 g q 4 h   ⇐

                               Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 45 min                         60 min
                                                       CPB: 90 min                                        105 min
                                                       Total: 3 h                                         ⇐

                               EBL                    300–400 mL                                          ⇐

                               Postop care            ICU: 1–3 d, intubated 6–24 h; hypertrophied,        ⇐
                                                      noncompliant LV requiring high preload.

                               Mortality              5–8%                                                ⇐

                               Morbidity              Pneumonia: 5–10%                                    ⇐
                                                      Neurological sequela:
                                                          Transient: 3–7%
                                                          CVA: 1–2%
     Cardiovascular

                                                          Permanent: 1–2%
        Surgery

                                                      Infection: 1%                                       ⇐

                               Pain score             7–10                                                7–10

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range              Bicuspid valves – 50–60 yr; rheumatic – 55–80 yr (mean = 58 ± 13 yr)

                               Male:Female            3:1

                               Incidence              70–100 cases/yr in tertiary care center

                               Etiology               Postrheumatic (majority of patients); aortic sclerosis; progressive stenosis of a bicuspid aortic
                                                      valve; endocarditis

                               Associated             Poststenotic dilatation of the ascending aorta (may require separate surgical attention); rheu-
                                 conditions           matic mitral valvular involvement; CAD; CHF

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                              Respiratory              Respiratory compromise may occur 2° pulmonary congestion (LV failure) and pleural effusion.
                                                       An effusion, if significant, should be drained prior to surgery, as it may impair oxygenation
                                                       and, with IPPV, may impair venous return →↓ CO + ↓ myocardial perfusion.
                                                       Tests: CXR

                              Cardiovascular           Aortic stenosis (AS): Sx are those of angina pectoris (if at rest may indicate concurrent
                                                       CAD), syncope, and CHF (indicates severe disease with 2-yr life expectancy). The ejection
                                                       murmur of AS is best heard at the 2nd right interspace. ECG shows LVH. Important points
                                                       in the preop investigations include:
                                                       • Aortic orifice size: moderate AS = 0.7–0.9 cm2; critical AS = < 0.5 cm2 (normal = 2.6–3.5 cm2)
                                                       • Aortic valvular gradient: severe = > 70 mm Hg
                                                       • Ejection fraction (EF): ↓ EF indicates evidence of LV failure (normal = > 0.6).
                                                       • Coronary angiography: associated CAD often demonstrated.
                                                        AS → ↑ LV work (↑ pressure load) → LV concentric hypertrophy → ↑ LV diastolic func-
                                                          tion + ↑ risk for ischemia (MVO2 + O2 supply).
                                                       • Reliance on atrial “kick:” important to maintain NSR.
                                                       • Sensitivity to changes in SVR: ↓ SVR → ↓↓ BP → ↓ myocardial perfusion + ↓ CO → ↓↓↓ BP.
                                                       • Sensitivity to volume changes: hypovolemia → ↓ preload → ↓ ↓ CO.

===== PAGE 363 =====
Aortic Valve Replacement      363

                    Cardiovascular            • Sensitivity to rate changes: tachycardia → ↓ ejection time → ↓ myocardial perfusion.
                      (cont’d)                • LV wall tension + ↑ duration of systole → ↑ MVO2.
                                              • ↑ LVEDP + ↑ wall thickness and tension + ↓ diastolic aortic pressure → ↓ O2 supply.
                                              Aortic regurgitation (AR): Sx include DOE, orthopnea, PND, palpitations, and (less fre-
                                              quently) angina. Exercise tolerance may remain reasonably good, even with severe chronic
                                              AR. Acute AR is very poorly tolerated. The pandiastolic murmur of AR is loudest over the
                                              sternum and left lower sternal border.
                                              AR → chronic LV volume overload → LV eccentric hypertrophy → massive cardiomegaly
                                              → LV failure (CHF) → ↑ LVEDP → ↑ PA pressure and pulmonary congestion.
                                              • Possibility of ischemia: ↑ MVO2 and ↓ supply (↓ diastolic pressure, ↑ HR).
                                              • Sensitivity to rate changes: ↓ HR → ↑ AR + ↓ CO.
                                              • Sensitivity to changes in SVR: ↑ SVR → ↑ regurgitation + ↓ CO.
                                              Tests: ECG: 3 hypertrophy, LV strain, ischemia, rhythm. ECHO: 3 LV function, valve area,
                                              regurgitant fraction. Angiography: 3 LV function, right heart pressure, CAD, valve area,
                                              regurgitant fraction.

                    Hepatic                   CHF may result in passive liver congestion with ↓ liver function and possible coagulopathy.
                                              Tests: LFTs; PT; PTT

                    Neurological              Syncopal episodes may have resulted in neurologic deficits. These should be well
                                              documented.

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                    Renal                     Prerenal failure often is associated with AR 2° ↓ CO.
                                              Tests: BUN; Cr, creatinine clearance, if indicated; electrolytes

                    Hematologic               Tests: Hb/Hct; clotting profile to investigate abnormalities. T&C for 8 U PRBCs.

                    Laboratory                3 digitalis level and electrolytes; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication             Beware of oversedation in patients with AS where ↓ BP could be detrimental. Light premed-
                                              ication with an anxiolytic is usually sufficient. Digitalis and diuretics should be continued.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                   induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be critical in the care of these patients, especially during
                   induction. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it is
                   not essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the CVP
                   catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv.

                    Induction                AS: Typically, O2 with moderate- to high-dose narcotic (e.g., fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg).
                                             Avoid sufentanil in AS because of ↓ BP. Etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg), midazolam
                                             (50–350 mcg/kg) may be used to supplement the above. Paralysis with vecuronium or
                                             pancuronium (0.1 mg/kg, depending on desired HR). Induction is a critical period. CPB
                                             and surgeons should be available and ready to proceed. Danger is hypotension with a
                                             cycle of ischemia, further hypotension and more ischemia. Hypotension should be
                                             treated aggressively with fluid and α-adrenergic agonists (phenylephrine 50–100 mcg iv
                                             bolus, infusion 0.1–0.75 mcg/kg/min). Critical AS patients may benefit from the use of
                                             phenylephrine as an infusion during induction and prebypass. The avoidance of hypoten-
                                             sion is even more critical in the presence of CAD. Drugs causing tachycardia should be
                                             avoided. Atrial fibrillation (AF) or SVT should be treated with cardioversion. β-blockers
                                             and other negative inotropes are generally contraindicated. Ventricular irritability should
                                             be treated early as ventricular fibrillation may be refractory to defibrillation. Beware of
                                             vasodilators, including NTG.
                                             AR: Again, O2 with moderate- to high-dose narcotic (e.g., fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg or suf-
                                             entanil 2.5–10 mcg/kg). Etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) or benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam
                                             50–350 mcg/kg) may be used to supplement the opiates. Muscle relaxation with pan-
                                             curonium (0.1 mg/kg). These patients benefit from fluid augmentation, high normal HR
                                             (90 bpm) with afterload reduction (e.g., SNP 0.25–2 mcg/kg/min) to improve forward flow.

===== PAGE 364 =====
364    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                              Maintenance             Narcotic (e.g., total fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg). Low–dose volatile agent/air/O2. Relaxant.
                                                      (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cardiopulmonary Bypass, p. 350.) The following table
                                                      summarizes the goals of intraop management:
                                                      Parameter                      AS                              R
                                                      LV preload                     ↑                               Normal-to-↑
                                                      HR                             Normal-to-slow ↓                Modest ↑
                                                      Rhythm                         NSR                             NSR
                                                      Contractility                  Maintain                        Maintain
                                                      SVR                            Modest ↑                        ↓
                                                      PVR                            Maintain                        Maintain

                              Postbypass              AS: Postbypass, patients may be hyperdynamic and require vasodilators for HTN, although
                                                      inotropes also may be needed. Because of the hypertrophied, noncompliant ventricle, fill-
                                                      ing pressure may be higher than normally required.
                                                      AR: In the immediate postbypass period, patients with AR may require inotropic support (e.g.,
                                                      dopamine 3–10 mcg/kg/min, dobutamine 5–10 mcg/kg/min; epinephrine 25–100 ng/kg/min)
                                                      is often needed. Maintain LV filling. Other supportive measures (e.g., IABP) may be necessary.

                              Emergence               Transport to ICU sedated, intubated (6–24 h), and ventilated. Early extubation may be pos-
                                                      sible if a lower-dose narcotic technique is used (fast-track).
     Cardiovascular

                                                      IV: 14 ga × 1–2
        Surgery

                              Blood and fluid
                                 requirements         NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h
                                                      UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h
                                                      Warm all fluids.
                                                      Humidify gases.
                                                      T&C 2–4 U blood

                              Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1)     Standard monitors and arterial line should be placed before
                                                      Arterial line                  induction.
                                                      CVP line                       CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usually is placed after
                                                      PA catheter                    intubation. CVP may underestimate left-side pressures. In
                                                                                     acute AR, PCWP may underestimate true LVEDP.
                                                      ECG                            V5 lead should be monitored for ischemia.
                                                      TEE                            TEE may be useful to estimate LV filling and regional wall
                                                                                     motion abnormalities.
                                                      Urinary catheter

                              Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                      3 eyes

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications           Hemorrhage                              Inotropic and vasodilator therapy usually is contin-
                                                      Tamponade                               ued into the postop period and then weaned.
                                                      Cardiac failure
                                                      Dysrhythmias
                                                      Ischemia

                              Pain                    Parenteral opioids for pain relief
                                management            Benzodiazepine for sedation

                              Tests                   ECG
                                                      CXR
                                                      Electrolytes
                                                      Coag profile
                                                      HCT

===== PAGE 365 =====
Mitral Valve Repair or Replacement          365

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt KH: Valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, ed. Kaplan’s Cardiac
                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2006, Chapter 20.
                     2. Fann JI, Miller DC, Moore KA, et al: Twenty-year clinical experience with porcine bioprostheses. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;
                        62:1301–12.
                     3. Murtuza B, Pepper JR, Stanbridge RD, et al: Minimal access aortic valve replacement: is it worth it? Ann Thorac Surg 2008;
                        85(3):1121–31.
                     4. Tjang YS, van Hees Y, Körfer R, et al: Predictors of mortality after aortic valve replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2007;
                        32(3):469–74.
                     5. Townsley MM, Martin DE: Anesthetic management for the surgical treatment of valvular heart disease. In: Hensley FA, Martin
                        DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 319–58.

                   MITRAL VALVE REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                               Cardiovascular
                   Description: Mitral valve repair or replacement is utilized typically for the correction of postrheumatic mitral

                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                   valvular stenosis or insufficiency, as well as mitral valve prolapse, degenerative mitral insufficiency, or repair after
                   endocarditis. For mitral regurgitation (MR) 2° posterior leaflet abnormalities (myxomatous degeneration, torn chor-
                   dae) or pure annular dilatation, most valves can be repaired. For severe rheumatic calcific mitral stenosis (MS), mitral
                   valve replacement with preservation of subannular structures may be necessary.
                   The technique of mitral valve repair or replacement is similar regardless of the mitral valve pathology. After aortic
                   and bicaval venous cannulation, CPB (see p. 348) is established, and the left heart is vented through the PA. After
                   cross-clamping of the aorta, diastolic arrest is accomplished with cardioplegia administered via the aortic root, aug-
                   mented with topical cooling with either continuous pericardial saline infusion or a cooling jacket. Exposure is accom-
                   plished via a vertical incision in the left atrium just posterior to atrial septum. If the left atrium is not large enough,
                   access may be gained via an incision in the right atrium and then incising the atrial septum, with caval snares in place
                   to prevent air entry into the venous cannulae.
                   After suitable exposure, the atrium, atrial appendage, and mitral valve are carefully inspected, and a decision is
                   made to repair or replace the valve. Repair of regurgitant valves caused primarily by posterior leaflet problems
                   is usually possible. Similarly, annular dilatation 2° LV enlargement is also usually possible by means of a ring an-
                   nuloplasty. Regurgitation 2° anterior leaflet abnormalities are more problematic, requiring significant expertise,
                   and may be less durable. Preop and postop evaluations are greatly facilitated by use of TEE. Valve replacement
                   can be performed after excising the valve leaflets; or, the leaflets may be preserved in an attempt to maintain the
                   benefits of the subvalvar apparatus to global ventricular performance. After appropriate excision and debride-
                   ment, the annulus is rimmed with interrupted sutures passed through the sewing ring of the valve prosthesis. The
                   prosthesis is carefully positioned, and the sutures are tied. After filling both the LV and atrium with blood, the
                   atrium is closed, air is evacuated from the left heart, and the cross-clamp is removed to allow coronary perfusion.
                   After a satisfactory period of resuscitation, and after all air has been evacuated from the circulation, CPB may be
                   D/C’d, usually with the assistance of vasodilator agents. TEE may be utilized at this stage to assess adequacy of
                   mitral valve repair.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Mitral valve repair may also be accomplished via a right anterior thora-
                   cotomy approach, with the patient positioned right side up in lateral decubitus position. Peripheral (femoral
                   artery-femoral vein) or central (femoral vein-aorta) bypass is used, and operation may be performed during ven-
                   tricular fibrillation or with aortic clamping and cardioplegia. Single lung anesthesia is necessary, either with a
                   double lumen endotracheal tube or with a right-sided bronchial blocker. Cannulation of the coronary sinus may
                   be requested, and the operative field will be flooded with CO2. TEE is extensively used for preop diagnosis and
                   postop monitoring of the surgical result. Mitral commissurotomy may be done as an endovascular procedure
                   (e.g., during pregnancy).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Class 3 or 4 CHF 2° mitral insufficiency or mitral stenosis

===== PAGE 366 =====
366    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                       Mitral Valve Replacement/Repair                      Closed Commissurotomy

                               Position                Supine                                               Right lateral decubitus

                               Incision                Median sternotomy                                    Left lateral thoracotomy

                               Special                 TEE and epicardial ECHO to assess valve func-        Performed without CPB.
                                 instrumentation       tion and regional wall motion; CPB.

                               Unique                  Special loading conditions may be used to            ⇐
                                 considerations        estimate the amount of MR, which is frequently
                                                       afterload-dependent.

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h   ⇐

                               Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 45–150 min                       Total: 2 h
                                                       CPB: 90–200 min                                      Total: 3–4 h

                               EBL                     300–400 mL                                           200–400 mL

                               Postop care             ICU × 1–3 d, intubated 6–24 h; vasodilator           ⇐
                                                       therapy for reversal of pulmonary HTN and
     Cardiovascular

                                                       afterload reduction.
        Surgery

                               Mortality               5–8%                                                 < 5%

                               Morbidity               Pneumonia: 10–15%                                    ⇐
                                                       CNS complications:
                                                           Transient neurologic dysfunction: 5–10%          ⇐
                                                           CVA: 1–2%                                        ⇐
                                                       Infection: < 1%                                      ⇐

                               Pain score              7–10                                                 7–10

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               40–75 yr                                             20–40 yr

                               Male:Female             1:1                                                  Almost exclusively pregnant females

                               Etiology                Post-rheumatic: majority of cases; increased         ⇐
                                                       aging; myxomatous degeneration; ischemic
                                                       etiologies (increasing)

                               Associated              Aortic valvular involvement with rheumatic           ⇐
                                 conditions            disease, CAD, pulmonary HTN, and tricuspid
                                                       regurgitation

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                              Respiratory               Pulmonary congestion, edema, pleural effusions may be present, with an overall restrictive
                                                        lung pattern. Pleural effusions should be drained before surgery if significant (↓ oxygen-
                                                        ation, ↓ venous return with IPPV). ↑ LA volume may compress the left recurrent laryngeal
                                                        nerve → left vocal cord paralysis (Ortner’s syndrome).
                                                        Tests: CXR; PFTs, if indicated

===== PAGE 367 =====
Mitral Valve Repair or Replacement        367

                    Cardiovascular          Mitral Stenosis (MS): Sx include exertional dyspnea and fatigue, progressing to pulmonary
                                            edema, atrial fibrillation (AF), and hemoptysis. Embolic events occur in 15% of patients. The
                                            opening snap and diastolic murmur of MS are best heard between apex and left sternal border.
                                            The ECG may show AF or wide-notched P-waves. It is important to grade the severity of MS
                                            by symptomatology and valve area: mild = 1.5–2 cm2; moderate = 1–1.5 cm2; and severe =
                                            < 1.0 cm2 (nl = 4–6 cm2). AF is often the factor precipitating deterioration in these patients.
                                            Because of the decreased LV filling, these patients are sensitive to:
                                            • Loss of atrial “kick:” maintain NSR.
                                            • Volume changes: keep full.
                                            • Rate changes: avoid ↑ HR → ↓diastolic filling time → ↓ CO.
                                            Pathophysiology:
                                            • MS → ↓ LVH filling → ↓ CO.
                                            • MS → ↑ LA pressure →pulmonary edema + ↑ PA pressure → ↑ PVR → RV failure + TR
                                               + left shift of iv septum → ↓ CO → ↑ LA pressure → ↑ LA volume → AF and thrombi.
                                            Mitral Regurgitation (MR): May be acute (MI/endocarditis) or chronic (often associated
                                            with MS). Chronic Sx include: palpitations, DOE, PND, fatigue, and orthopnea. Acute MR
                                            may → sudden ↓↓ CO and pulmonary edema. MR can be classified as mild (< 30% RF),
                                            moderate (30–60% RF), or severe (> 60% RF). The pansystolic murmur is loudest at the
                                            apex. The ECG may show LA and LV overload. MR patients are sensitive to:

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                                            • Changes in SVR: ↑ SVR → ↑ RF → ↓ CO + ↓ BP.

                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                                                              ↓ SVR → ↓ RF → ↑ CO + ↑ BP.
                                            • Change in HR:   • ↓ HR →acute LA volume overload.
                                                                 Mild ↑ HR→ ↑ CO
                                            Pathophysiology:
                                            • Acute MR → ↑ ↑ LA pressure → ↓ CO + ↓ BP → ↑ HR → ↑ contractility → ↑ O2 demand.
                                                        → ↑ LV diastolic volume → ↑ LVEDP →↑ O2 demand.
                                                        → Pulmonary edema.
                                            • Chronic MR → ↑ LA volume + AF → pulmonary edema → RV failure.
                                                   → LV volume overload → LVH → ↓ CO + LV failure.
                                            Tests: ECG: 3 LVH, left and right atrial enlargement, rhythm. ECHO: 3 RF, valve pressure
                                            gradients, LV function, valve pressure gradient and area.

                    Neurological            The large left atrium and AF may result in thrombus formation, with the possibility of
                                            embolism. Neurological deficits should be documented.

                    Gastrointestinal        Hepatic congestion may → decreased function, which may be reflected in coagulation
                                            problems.
                                            Tests: Consider LFTs; PT; PTT.

                    Renal                   ↓ CO may lead to renal failure.
                                            Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                    Hematologic             Because of the potential for thromboembolism, these patients may be on anticoagulants,
                                            which may be given up to the day before surgery. In the case of Coumadin, anticoagulant
                                            effects can be reversed by the use of FFP and vitamin K.
                                            Tests: Consider PT; PTT.

                    Laboratory              T&C for 2–4 U PRBCs. Hb/Hct; coagulation profile; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication           Premedication with an anxiolytic (e.g., lorazepam 1–2 mg po, midazolam 0.05–0.2 mg/kg im)
                                            or an analgesic (e.g., morphine 0.1–0.2 mg/kg); or a combination of these agents may be
                                            used, depending on patient status.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                   induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be critical in the care of these patients, especially during

===== PAGE 368 =====
368    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                             induction. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it is
                             not essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the CVP
                             catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv.

                              Induction                 Typically, moderate- to high-dose narcotic (fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg or sufentanil 2.5–20
                                                        mcg/kg), supplemental midazolam (50–350 mcg/kg) or etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg). Use
                                                        pancuronium (MR) or vecuronium (MS) (0.1 mg/kg), depending on the desired HR to
                                                        facilitate intubation.
                                                        MS: ↓ BP should be treated with fluid, but beware of precipitating pulmonary edema.
                                                        Occasionally, phenylephrine may be needed to maintain SVR. Tachycardia should be avoid-
                                                        ed; if it occurs, it should be treated (↑ anesthesia, esmolol if ventricular function is preserved).
                                                        Sinus rhythm should be maintained. New onset atrial flutter/AF should be treated with
                                                        defibrillation. Avoid factors that may increase PVR (N2O, acidosis, hypoxia, hypercarbia).
                                                        MR: Maintain or augment preload, depending on response to fluid load. Inotropic
                                                        agents may be useful to maintain contractility. Afterload reduction will improve for-
                                                        ward flow. Generally SNP (0.5–4 mcg/kg/min) is used, but NTG (0.5–4 mcg/kg/min)
                                                        may be more appropriate in patients with ischemia-induced regurgitation. Avoid
                                                        ↑ PVR caused by N2O, acidosis, hypoxia, or hypercarbia. IABP may be useful periop
                                                        in patients with acute MR 2° MI (↓ afterload, ↑ coronary perfusion pressure).
                                                        Narcotic (total = fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg, or sufentanil 5–20 mcg/kg) with benzodiazepine
     Cardiovascular

                              Maintenance
                                                        (e.g., midazolam 50–350 mcg/kg) for amnesia; low-dose isoflurane; O2/air.
        Surgery

                                                        The following table summarizes the goals of intraop management:
                                                        Parameter                        MS                               MR
                                                        LV preload                       Normal-to-↑                      Normal-to-↑
                                                        HR                               ↓                                ↑
                                                        Rhythm                           NSR                              NSR
                                                        Contractility                    Maintain                         Maintain
                                                        SVR                              Normal                           ↓
                                                        PVR                              Avoid ↑                          Avoid ↑

                              Postbypass                Although patients with MS generally do well after valve replacement, inotropes (e.g.,
                                                        dopamine, dobutamine) occasionally are necessary. This is especially true late in the dis-
                                                        ease when cardiomyopathy may be present.

                              Emergence                 Transport to ICU, intubated and ventilated 6–24 h. Early extubation is possible if lower-
                                                        dose narcotic technique is used (fast-track).

                              Blood and fluid           IV: 14 ga × 1–2
                                 requirements           NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h
                                                        Maintain UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h.
                                                        Warm all fluids.
                                                        Humidify gases.

                              Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)       Standard monitors and an A-line are placed before induc-
                                                        Arterial line                    tion. CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usually is placed
                                                        CVP line                         after intubation. Care should be exercised with PA catheter
                                                        PA catheter                      insertion because the dilated PA may be susceptible to rup-
                                                        Urinary catheter                 ture with the catheter. In MS, PCWP may overestimate the
                                                                                         LV filling pressure due to stenosis.
                                                        TEE                              TEE may help in volume management, regional wall motion
                                                                                         abnormalities (postacute MI), and assessing the success of
                                                                                         mitral valve repair. Occasionally, the use of a valve ring during
                                                                                         repair may cause systolic anterior motion of the valve leaflet
                                                                                         with resultant regurgitation, which may be seen on TEE.

                              Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                                        3 eyes

===== PAGE 369 =====
Tricuspid Valve Repair       369

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Hemorrhage                                  Inotropic support or vasodilator therapy may be
                                                Tamponade                                   needed. IABP for mitral incompetence, especially
                                                Cardiac failure                             in the presence of acute MR 2° infarction.
                                                Dysrhythmias
                                                Conduction defects
                                                Atrioventricular disruption

                    Pain                        Parenteral opioids for pain relief
                      management                Benzodiazepine for sedation

                    Tests                       ECG
                                                CXR
                                                ABG
                                                Coag profile
                                                Electrolytes

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Calvinho P, Antunes M: Current surgical management of mitral regurgitation. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther 2008; 6(4):481–90.

                                                                                                                                                                   Cardiovascular
                     2. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt KH: Valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, ed. Kaplan’s Cardiac

                                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2006, Chapter 20.
                     3. Dunning J, Versteegh M, Fabbri A, et al: Guideline on antiplatelet and anticoagulation management in cardiac surgery. Eur J
                        Cardiothorac Surg 2008; 34(1):73–92.
                     4. Fann JI, Miller DC, Moore KA, et al: Twenty-year clinical experience with porcine bioprostheses. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;
                        62:1301–2.
                     5. Greco E, Zaballos JM, Alvarez L, et al: Video-assisted mitral surgery through a micro-access: a safe and reliable reality in the
                        current era. J Heart Valve Dis 2008; 17(1):48–53.
                     6. Townsley MM, Martin DE: Anesthetic management for the surgical treatment of valvular heart disease. In: Hensley FA, Martin
                        DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2013, 319–58.

                   TRICUSPID VALVE REPAIR
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Insufficiency of the tricuspid valve is almost always 2° left-sided valvular disease, with tricuspid annular
                   dilatation and resultant valvular insufficiency usually 2° pulmonary HTN. Some congenital conditions (e.g., Ebstein’s
                   deformity) may persist into early adulthood, when replacement is usually necessary. Tricuspid repair is normally possible
                   in the absence of primary involvement of tricuspid leaflets. The procedure is usually accomplished on CPB (see p. 348),
                   either with the heart fibrillating or during a brief period of aortic cross-clamping and diastolic arrest. After instituting
                   CPB and snaring the venous cannulae to prevent air entry into the pump circuit, the tricuspid valve is exposed through
                   an incision in the right atrium. In the absence of leaflet involvement by the rheumatic process, repair usually can be
                   accomplished by a simple annuloplasty. After atrial closure, evacuation of air, and myocardial resuscitation, the patient is
                   weaned from CPB with vasodilator agents. Temporary pacing wires usually are inserted and passed to the anesthesiolo-
                   gist in case inadvertent injury to the AV node or His bundle causes complete heart block.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Tricuspid valve replacement
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Tricuspid regurgitation, 2° annular dilatation 2° pulmonary HTN and left-side failure

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                  Supine

                     Incision                  Median sternotomy

===== PAGE 370 =====
370    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Special                 Intraop ECHO; hemodynamic monitoring; CPB
                                 instrumentation

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h

                               Surgical time           Aortic cross-clamp: 30–40 min
                                                       CPB: 70–80 min
                                                       Total: 3–4 h

                               EBL                     400–800 mL (Long-standing tricuspid regurgitation may → impaired hepatic production of co-
                                                       agulation factors.)

                               Postop care             ICU × 1–3 d, intubated 6–24 h; vasodilator therapy for pulmonary HTN

                               Mortality               2–3%

                               Morbidity               3rd-degree heart block: 10%
                                                       RV failure: 2–3%

                               Pain score              7–10

                               ■■ PaTIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                               Age range               50–75 yr

                               Male:Female             1:1

                               Incidence               Rare

                               Etiology                Rheumatic; congenital (Ebstein’s anomaly)

                               Associated              Rheumatic involvement of left-side valves with pulmonary HTN
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE

                               Cardiovascular           Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) usually is well tolerated, and Sx (↓ CO) may go unnoticed,
                                                        masked by Sx associated with left-side valvular disease and pulmonary HTN. Occasionally,
                                                        TR is 2° endocarditis and raises the suspicion of iv drug abuse. TR may be caused by pul-
                                                        monary HTN → ↑ RV afterload → RV dilation, ↑ RV wall tension → dilation of tricuspid
                                                        valve annulus and TR. TR may also occur in heart transplant patients due to endomyocar-
                                                        dial biopsies and in patients with PM and ICDs, particularly after lead removal.
                                                        Pathophysiology:
                                                        • TR → ↓ CO 2° ↑ RV size → shift of the intraventricular septum to the left → ↓ LV size, ↓
                                                           LV compliance → LV underloading due to ↓ LV size and ↓ RV stroke volume.
                                                        • TR → atrial fibrillation (AF) 2° ↑ right atrial size. In isolated insufficiency, the ↑ in right
                                                           atrial pressure may result in shunting across a patent foramen ovale (PFO), leading to
                                                           paradoxical embolization with potentially disastrous consequences.
                                                        Tests: ECG: 3 AF. ECHO: 3 relative chamber size, contractility, PFO, valve lesions. Car-
                                                        diac catheterization: 3 contractility, CO, pulmonary pressures and their response to vaso-
                                                        dilators, other valvular pathology.

                               Respiratory              Pulmonary HTN (> 25 mm Hg mean pressure), pulmonary edema, and effusions may be
                                                        present.
                                                        Tests: CXR: 3 pulmonary edema, pleural effusion.

                               Renal                    Chronic venous congestion may → prerenal failure.
                                                        Tests: BUN; Cr; electrolytes

                               Hepatic                  Hepatic congestion may → impaired synthetic function, particularly coag factors.
                                                        Tests: Consider PT; PTT.

===== PAGE 371 =====
Tricuspid Valve Repair     371

                     Hematologic              Tests: Hb/Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P and Sx. Consider viral testing (HIV,
                                              hepatitis in isolated tricuspid endocarditis or in iv drug abusers). T&C 2–4 U PRBCs.

                     Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                     Premedication            Standard premedication (p. B-1) is usually appropriate.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                   induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be critical in the care of these patients, especially during
                   induction. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it is
                   not essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the CVP
                   catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv.

                    Induction                 Typically, O2 and premedicate with midazolam (2–5 mg). Induce with moderate- to high-dose
                                              narcotic (fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg or sufentanil 2.5–20 mcg/kg) with etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/
                                              kg) or propofol (0.5–1 mg/kg). Muscle relaxation is obtained with a nondepolarizing agent
                                              (e.g., rocuronium 1–1.5 mg/kg, vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg).

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                    Maintenance               The choice of narcotic/benzodiazepine/O2 or volatile agent and O2 will be determined

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                              by the underlying lesion and ventricular function. Avoid N2O (pulmonary HTN). Low-
                                              dose isoflurane may be used. Benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam 50–200 mcg/kg) may be
                                              used for amnesia. Exact choice of agents for maintenance depends on underlying lesion,
                                              ventricular function, and coexisting disease. Management goals of TR are often those of
                                              coexisting valvular problems. The general principles, however, are: (1) Adequate preload
                                              (↓ preload →↓ RV stroke volume); (2) HR: normal-to-increased; (3) Contractility: nor-
                                              mal. May require inotropic support for ↑ PVR, anesthetic myocardial depression or IPPV;
                                              (4) PVR: normal or decreased (high PVR →↓ RV stroke volume); (5) SVR: little effect un-
                                              less it affects left-side pathology.

                    Emergence                 To ICU intubated and ventilated × 6–24 h. Early extubation may be possible if a lower-dose
                                              narcotic technique is used (fast-track).

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 14 ga × 1–2                          Because of the possibility of PFO and R→L shunt,
                       requirements           NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h                      ensure that all venous lines are clear of air.
                                              UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h
                                              Warm all fluids.
                                              Humidify gases.
                                              T&C 2–4 U PRBC.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)               Standard monitors and an A-line are placed before
                                              Arterial line                            induction.
                                              CVP or PA catheter                       CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usually is placed
                                              Urinary catheter                         after intubation. CVP may be a poor indicator of RV
                                                                                       or LV filling. The PA catheter may be helpful in the
                                                                                       management of fluid balance, CO, and management of
                                                                                       pulmonary HTN, but may be difficult to place and will
                                                                                       require removal while valve or annular ring is placed.
                                              TEE                                      Because RV distention may affect LV filling and
                                                                                       stroke volume, TEE may be useful in judging filling
                                                                                       and relative LV size.

                    Pulmonary HTN             ↑ PVR can result from:                    In TR, control of PVR is important because ↑ PVR
                                                 ↓ PaO2                                 may result in ↓ CO. Hypoxia, hypercarbia, acido-
                                                 ↑ PaCO2                                sis, N2O, or α-agonists may ↑ PVR. PVR may be
                                                 ↓ pH                                  reduced with hypocarbia, inotropic support with
                                                 N2O                                   dopamine (5–10 mcg/kg/min), isoproterenol (10–
                                                 α-agonists                             50 ng/kg/min), or milrinone 0.375–0.75 mg/kg/min

===== PAGE 372 =====
372    c h a p t e r 6.1      Cardiac Surgery

                              Pulmonary HTN                Inadequate anesthesia                          and by using pulmonary vasodilators—NTG (1–4
                                (cont’d)                                                                  mcg/kg/min), SNP (0.5–2 mcg/kg/min), prosta-
                                                                                                          glandin E1 (0.05–0.4 mcg/kg/min), or inhaled NO
                                                                                                          (10–100 ppm).

                              Positioning                  3 and pad pressure points
                                                           3 eyes

                              Complications                Coagulopathy                                   Coagulopathy 2° prolonged bypass time for mul-
                                                           Hemorrhage                                     tiple valve replacements.
                                                           RV failure                                     RV failure 2° ↑ PVR (previously, RV decompressed
                                                                                                          by tricuspid incompetence). Rx includes inotro-
                                                                                                          pes: dopamine (5–10 mcg/kg/min), isoproterenol
                                                                                                          (25–100 ng/kg/min), milrinone (infusion 0.3–0.75
                                                                                                          mcg/kg/min), epinephrine (25–100 ng/kg/min),
                                                                                                          avoidance of factors causing ↑ PVR, and the use of
                                                                                                          pulmonary vasodilators.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                              Complications                Hemorrhage                                    Inotropic support and pulmonary vasodilators will
                                                           Coagulopathy                                  need to be continued. Avoid those factors that ↑
                                                           Dysrhythmias                                  PVR.
                                                           RV failure
                                                           Infection
                                                           Renal impairment
                                                           Methemoglobinemia                             Measure metHb levels
                                                                                                         during NO therapy.

                              Pain                         Parenteral opioids                            Supplement with benzodiazepine for sedation.
                                management

                              Tests                        ECG
                                                           Coag profile
                                                           Renal panel: BUN, Cr
                                                           ABG
                                                           Electrolytes

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt KH: Valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, ed. Kaplan’s Cardiac
                                   Anesthesia, 5th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2006, Chapter 20.
                                2. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt KH: Valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, Reich DL, Savino JS, eds. Kaplan’s
                                   Cardiac Anesthesia: The Echo Era, 6th edition. Saunders/Elsevier, St. Louis: 2011, Chapter 19 (Tricuspid regurgitation, p. 603–4).
                                3. Townsley MM, Martin DE: Anesthetic management for the surgical treatment of valvular heart disease, Sections X. Tricuspid
                                   stenosis and XI. Tricuspid regurgitation. In: Hensley FA Jr, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac
                                   Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012, Chapter 12 p. 349–51.

                             SEPTAL MYECTOMY/MYOTOMY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Patients with asymmetric septal hypertrophy usually present with symptoms 2° LV outflow tract
                             obstruction (LVOTO), increased diastolic dysfunction and stiffness, or a combination of the two, manifested as syn-
                             cope, CHF, or severe chest pain. The systolic hemodynamic abnormality is caused by the anterior leaflet of the mitral

===== PAGE 373 =====
Septal Myectomy/Myotomy       373

                   valve being drawn into the LV outflow tract (LVOT) and abutting the asymmetrically hypertrophied intraventricular
                   septum, narrowing the LVOT, and producing a large dynamic intracavitary gradient. In addition, severe mitral insuf-
                   ficiency may result. The most common surgical procedure for asymmetric septal hypertrophy is septal myectomy/
                   myotomy. After institution of CPB, aortic cross-clamping, and cardioplegic arrest, the aorta is opened, and visual-
                   ization of the subvalvar ventricular septum is attained. Bimanual palpation, as well as TEE visualization, can localize
                   the asymmetric hypertrophy. Using the right coronary orifice as a landmark, the ventricular septum is longitudinally
                   incised with two parallel incisions ~1 cm apart, with care being taken to avoid injury of the papillary muscle or mitral
                   valve chordae. A trough of the hypertrophied septum is then excised, alleviating the LVOTO. Removal of a portion
                   of the asymmetrically hypertrophied myopathic septum also usually reduces the systolic anterior motion (SAM) of
                   the anterior mitral leaflet and reduces the intracavitary gradient and mitral regurgitation (MR). Infrequently, mitral
                   valve replacement may be necessary for persistent MR.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Asymmetric septal hypertrophy with CHF, chest pain, and/or syncope

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Median sternotomy

                     Special                TEE; hemodynamic monitoring; CPB
                       instrumentation

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                     Unique                 Because of LV hypertrophy, maintenance of adequate preload is essential. Afterload also must
                       considerations       be maintained to prevent LVOTO. Temporary pacing wires usually are placed at the start of the
                                            procedure.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h

                     Surgical time          2.5 h

                     EBL                    150 mL

                     Postop care            ICU, intubated on ventilator 6–24 h

                     Mortality              3–4%

                     Morbidity              Complete heart block: 5%
                                            Persistent MR: 5%
                                            New aortic insufficiency: 2–5%
                                            CVA: < 1%
                                            VSD: < 1%

                     Pain score             6–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              20–80 yr (mean = 45 yr)

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              10/yr at Stanford University Medical Center

                     Etiology               Asymmetric septal hypertrophy

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE

                    Respiratory              Affected only 2° to cardiac failure.

                    Cardiovascular           Patients with idiopathic hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) often pres-
                                             ent with Sx of syncope, angina pectoris (CAD), CHF, and palpitations. The main feature
                                             of HOCM is dynamic LVOTO 2° to septal hypertrophy and a possible venturi effect that
                                             draws the anterior mitral valve leaflet into the outflow tract. LVOTO →↑ LV hypertrophy

===== PAGE 374 =====
374    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                              Cardiovascular           → ↓ compliance and ↓ diastolic function → ↑ LVEDP, making diastolic filling dependent
                                (cont’d)               on preload and atrial contraction. Obstruction is worsened by decreased preload or after-
                                                       load, increased contractility or HR. HOCM also results in ↑ MVO2 and ↓ coronary perfu-
                                                       sion, especially to the septum and subendocardium, which increases the risk of ischemia.
                                                       Hypertrophy occurs throughout the whole myocardium and may lead to further dysfunc-
                                                       tion. MR, caused by a venturi suction effect, is often present and is exacerbated by the
                                                       same conditions that increase LVOTO. (Note that ↓ afterload → ↑ MR, unlike the usual
                                                       [nonventuri-suction] form of MR.) Patients are often on β-blockers or Ca++ antagonists.
                                                       These should be continued to day of surgery.
                                                       Tests: ECG: 3 Q-waves (indicative of septal hypertrophy); short PR interval with slurred
                                                       QRS complex; supraventricular tachycardia; LV hypertrophy.
                                                       ECHO: 3 septal hypertrophy; MR; LV hypertrophy, myocardial dysfunction.
                                                       Cardiac catheterization: 3 LVOT pressure gradient, which may increase with provocation
                                                       (e.g., Valsalva maneuver); obliteration of the LV cavity; MR; CAD.

                              Neurological             Document syncope and any neurological deficits.

                              Laboratory               Hb/Hct; electrolytes; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                              Premedication             Avoid activation of the sympathetic nervous system because this will cause ↑ HR and ↓
                                                       inotropy →↓ CO + ↓ BP. Thus, adequate anxiolysis is essential and can be obtained by
     Cardiovascular

                                                        premedication with a benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam 0.05–0.2 mg/kg im, lorazepam 1–2
        Surgery

                                                        mg po, or diazepam 5–10 mg po). Avoid ↓ SVR, and maintain β-blockade and Ca++ channel
                                                       blocker therapy.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                             induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring is critical in the care of these patients, especially during induc-
                             tion. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it is not
                             essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the CVP
                             catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv.

                              Induction                Typically, moderate dose narcotic (fentanyl 2–5 mcg/kg; avoid sufentanil due to vasodila-
                                                       tion). Supplement with etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg), midazolam (50–350 mcg/kg), or propofol
                                                       (0.5–1 mg/kg). Ketamine should be avoided due to the activation of the sympathetic ner-
                                                       vous system. Introduction of a volatile agent prior to intubation may be helpful. Vecuronium
                                                       (0.1 mg/kg) or rocuronium (1–1.5 mg/kg) for muscle relaxation.

                              Maintenance              O2 and narcotic (total fentanyl 10–100 mcg/kg) + volatile agent. Midazolam (50–350 mcg/
                                                       kg) can be used for amnesia. The cornerstone of anesthesia for HOCM is to avoid factors that
                                                       will increase LVOTO: (1) ↓ preload, (2) ↓ afterload, (3) ↑ contractility, (4) loss of NSR, and
                                                       (5) ↑ HR.

                              Emergence                To ICU intubated and ventilated × 6–24 h. Early extubation is possible if a lower-dose nar-
                                                       cotic technique is used (fast-track).

                              Blood and fluid          IV: 14 ga × 1–2
                                 requirements          NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h
                                                       Maintain UO 0.5–1 mL/h
                                                       Warm fluids.
                                                       Humidify gases.

                              Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)          Standard monitors and an A-line are placed before
                                                       Arterial line                       induction.
                                                       PA catheter                         CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usually is placed
                                                       Urinary catheter                    after intubation. A PA catheter is useful for assess-
                                                                                           ment of LV filling (keep high normal PCWP) and for

===== PAGE 375 =====
Septal Myectomy/Myotomy           375

                    Monitoring                                                      monitoring SVR (normal-to-high). A pacing or pace
                      (cont’d)                                                      port PA catheter may be useful for conduction prob-
                                                                                    lems occurring postop.
                                              TEE                                   TEE is useful to judge LV filling, LV contractility, LVOTO,
                                                                                    MR, and VSD (post myectomy).

                    Intraoperative            ↓ Preload                             Rx: volume, phenylephrine
                       problems               ↓ Afterload                           Rx: phenylephrine
                                              ↑ Contractility                       Rx: esmolol
                                              ↑ HR                                  Rx: esmolol
                                              Loss of NSR                           Rx: cardioversion, verapamil
                                              Complete heart block                  Should have reliable means of pacing available, including
                                                                                    temporary ventricular leads.
                                              VSD                                   Septum may be damaged, → VSD (diagnosed by TEE).
                                                                                    If present, it should be repaired.

                    Position                  3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                           Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                    Complications             Hemorrhage                            Dx: from chest tube drainage. Rx with blood and factors
                                                                                    as needed. 3 coag status. May require reexploration.
                                              Complete heart block                  Pacing should be available. Occasionally, inotropes of
                                                                                    vasodilators required. β-blockers and Ca++ antagonists
                                                                                    usually D/C’d.
                                              Late VSD                              Late VSD, indicated by development of a murmur, will
                                                                                    require repair.
                                              Tamponade                             Dx: by raising filling pressure, equalization of CVP,
                                                                                    and PADP, ↓ CO, ↓ UO, and by ECHO. Rx: re-
                                                                                    exploration and drainage.

                    Pain                      Parenteral opioids                    Supplement with benzodiazepine for sedation.
                      management

                    Tests                     ECG: 3 conduction problems.
                                              ABG
                                              ECHO: 3 LVOTO; VSD.
                                              Coag profile
                                              Electrolytes

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt KH: Valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, ed. Kaplan’s Cardiac
                        Anesthesia, 5th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2006, Chapter 20.
                     2. Cook DJ, Housmans PR, Rehfeldt: valvular heart disease: replacement and repair. In: Kaplan JA, Reich DL, Savino JS, eds.
                        Kaplan’s Cardiac Anesthesia: The Echo Era, 6th Edition. Saunders/Elsevier, St. Louis: 2011, Chapter 19 (Hypertrophic
                        Cardiomyopathy, p. 584–9).
                     3. Maron BJ: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a systematic review. JAMA 2002; 287(10):1308–20.
                     4. Togni M, Billinger M, Cook S, et al: Septal myectomy: cut, coil, or boil? Eur Heart J 2008; 29(3):296–8.
                     5. Townsley MM, Martin DE: Anesthetic management for the surgical treatment of valvular heart disease, Section VI.
                        Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In: Hensley FA Jr, Martin DE, Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia,
                        5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013, Chapter 12, p. 349-51.

===== PAGE 376 =====
376    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                             PACEMAKER INSERTION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Pacemaker insertion may be required for relief of abnormalities of the conduction system. A transve-
                             nous pacemaker lead may be placed via the subclavian vein, through the tricuspid valve into the RV (single-chamber pac-
                             ing); or two leads may be placed, one into the right atrium and the other into the RV (dual-chamber pacing). Typically,
                             2nd- or 3rd-degree heart block is the diagnostic indication, although sick sinus syndrome (SSS) and other abnormali-
                             ties also may be found. Access to the subclavian veins usually is attained percutaneously, although a cut-down may be
                             used to expose the cephalic vein in the deltopectoral groove. Passage of a guide wire into the RV may cause frequent
                             premature ventricular beats, which usually subside spontaneously with repositioning of the guide wire or lead. After
                             ventricular and/or atrial lead placement, the pacing lead will have to be tested for sensing threshold, pacing threshold,
                             depolarization amplitude, and lead resistance. After satisfactory placement of the pacing leads, the actual pacemaker
                             generator unit is connected and then placed in a subcutaneous pocket at the site of percutaneous lead placement.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Abnormalities of S-A nodal function (SSS) or A-V nodal function (heart block)

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                Supine
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                               Incision                Left subclavicular; mostly percutaneous

                               Special                 Fluoroscopy with fluoro-table
                                 instrumentation

                               Unique                  Patient usually awake with mild sedation
                                 considerations

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv prior to incision

                               Surgical time           1h

                               EBL                     Minimal

                               Postop care             PACU → CCU; ECG monitoring × 2–4 h; chest radiograph to document lead configuration.

                               Mortality               0–1%

                               Morbidity               Lead displacement: 1–2%
                                                       Pneumothorax: 1–2%

                               Pain score              2

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range               50–80 yr

                               Male:Female             2:1

                               Incidence               Infrequent

                               Etiology                CAD; cardiac valve repair/replacement

                               Associated              Complete heart block with syncope; SSS; paroxysmal tachycardia; SVT
                                 conditions

===== PAGE 377 =====
Pacemaker Insertion     377

                    Table 6.1-4. Five-Position Pacemaker Code (ICHD)
                    I                     II                       III                IV                        V
                    Chamber(s) Paced      Chamber(s) Sensed        Response(s) to     Programmability, Rate     Special Tachyarrhythmia
                                                                   Sensing            Modulation                Functions
                    V - Ventricle         V - Ventricle            T - Triggered      P - Simple Programmable   B - Bursts
                                                                                      (rate and/or output)
                    A - Atrium            A - Atrium               I - Inhibited      M - Multiprogrammable     N - Normal rate competition
                    D - Dual              D - Dual                 D - Dual (T + I)   C - Communicating         S - Scanning
                    O - None              O - None                 O - None           R - Rate modulation
                                                                                      O - None                  E - External

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The indications for permanent pacemaker insertion are usually bradydysrhythmias (e.g., 3rd-degree heart block,
                   sinus node dysfunction) or, less commonly, tachycardia (e.g., atrial flutter not responsive to medical therapy). There
                   are many different types of pacemakers, which are classified according to the chamber paced, chamber sensed,
                   response to sensing, programmability, and anti-tachyarrhythmia functions. The anesthesiologist should be aware of

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                   the type of pacemaker to be implanted and the means for external control.

                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                    Cardiovascular             Evaluate patient for associated disease, including CAD (~50%), HTN (~20%), cardiomyopathy,
                                               CHF, valvular defect, and for any symptoms or recent changes related to the conduction
                                               problems (syncope, CHF). It is important to know the reason for pacemaker implantation
                                               and the patient’s escape rhythm. These patients are often on antidysrhythmics, diuretics,
                                               cardiac glycosides, and a variety of other cardiovascular agents, which should be continued
                                               up to the day of surgery.
                                               Tests: Exercise tolerance by Hx. ECG: 3 rate, ischemic changes, rhythm. Other tests as
                                               indicated by H&P. 3 serum digoxin and other antidysrhythmic levels.

                    Pacemaker                  If a permanent pacemaker is already in place, its type and present functional state should
                                               be assessed. (Sx of problems include chest pain, palpitations, syncope, and weakness.) If
                                               no permanent pacemaker, a temporary transvenous pacemaker should be placed before
                                               surgery, except in unusual circumstances.
                                               Tests: ECG: 3 Valsalva maneuver or carotid sinus massage—may slow the heart sufficient-
                                               ly to allow the permanent pacemaker to fire and allow assessment of function. A rate lower
                                               than the set rate may indicate battery failure. CXR: 3 lead continuity.

                    Hematologic                Hct or Hb

                    Laboratory                 3 K+ level, which can affect pacing threshold, → loss of pacemaker capture, if low, or ven-
                                               tricular tachycardia, if high. Other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication              Standard premedication (p. B-1)

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Permanent pacemakers commonly are placed via the transvenous route, requiring only
                   local anesthesia and MAC with sedation. For epicardial pacemaker placement, GETA is required. These patients
                   should be monitored during transport to OR. Care is taken to avoid dislodging temporary pacing electrodes. The
                   function of the temporary pacemaker should be checked prior to induction.

===== PAGE 378 =====
378    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                             General anesthesia:

                              Induction                    Usually anesthesia can be induced with propofol (1–2 mg/kg) or etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg)
                                                           in combination with an opiate (e.g., fentanyl 1–2 mcg/kg) to attenuate the response to
                                                           intubation. Vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg) or rocuronium (1 mg/kg) will provide adequate mus-
                                                           cle relaxation.

                              Maintenance                  Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Avoid excessive hyperventilation (→↓ K+), and use volatile
                                                           agents with caution because they may increase A-V conduction time.

                              Emergence                    Generally, patient is extubated at the end of the case.

                              Blood and fluid              Minimal fluid requirements
                                 requirements              IV: 16 ga × 1
                                                           NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h

                              Monitoring                   Standard monitors (p. B-1)                  Rarely, arterial line if patient disease indicates.
                                                           Urinary catheter

                              Electrocautery               Minimize by:                                The use of electrocautery may interfere with pace-
                                 interference              • Using bipolar cautery, if possible;       maker function and → dysrhythmias or failure of
                                                           • Grounding pad on leg;                     the pacemaker. Monitor ECG and pulse (because
     Cardiovascular

                                                           • Limiting cautery output;                  electrical activity does not mean CO) for interfer-
        Surgery

                                                           • Limiting cautery use.                     ence. Have a magnet available to convert the pace-
                                                                                                       maker to asynchronous mode (check that this is
                                                                                                       possible and will not change the programming of
                                                                                                       the pacemaker).

                              Complications                Dysrhythmias                                Availability of temporary pacing is important
                                                           Air embolism                                because complete heart block or dislodgement of
                                                           Cardiac tamponade                           leads may occur. In addition, pharmacologic agents
                                                           Hemo/pneumothorax                           (atropine, 0.5–2 mg; isoproterenol 10–100 ng/kg/
                                                           Hemorrhage                                  min) to increase HR should be available.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications                       Dislodging of electrodes
                                                                  Dysrhythmias
                                                                  Pneumothorax
                                                                  Tamponade

                              Pain management                     Parenteral opioids for pain relief
                                                                  Benzodiazepine for sedation

                              Tests                               ECG
                                                                  CXR
                                                                  Electrolytes

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Luck JC: Arrhythmia, rhythm management devices, and catheter surgical ablation. In: Hensley FA, Martin DE, Gravlee GP,
                                   eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, Chapter 4.
                                2. Reynolds DW, Murray CM: New concepts in physiologic cardiac pacing. Curr Cardiol Rep 2007; 9(5):351–7.
                                3. Rosenfeld LE, Elefteriades JA: Surgical and device therapy for cardiac arrhythmias. In: Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG, eds.
                                   Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 617–36.
                                4. Rozner MA: The patient with a cardiac pacemaker or implanted defibrillator and management during anaesthesia. Curr Opin
                                   Anaesthesiol 2007; 20(3):261–8.
                                5. Rozner MA: Cardiac pacing and defibrillation. In: Kaplan JA, Reich DL, Savino JS, eds. Kaplan’s Cardiac Anesthesia: The Echo
                                   Era, 6th edition. Saunders/Elsevier, St. Louis: 2001, Chapter 25. (Pacemakers, p. 790–99).
                                6. Samii SM, Luck JC Jr: Arrhythmia, rhythm management devices and catheter and surgical ablation. In: Hensley FA Jr, Martin
                                   DE, Gravelee GP eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                                   2013, Chapter 17, p. 506–33.

===== PAGE 379 =====
Pericardiectomy   379

                   PERICARDIECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Constrictive pericarditis, either acute or chronic, interferes with ventricular filling, reducing stroke
                   volume and depressing the cardiac index (CI). Although there are many possible etiologies (infectious, nephrogenic,
                   postradiation), the cause remains unknown for a majority of patients. Typically, patients present with a progressive
                   Hx of breathlessness, fatigability, or peripheral or abdominal swelling, often months to years after the inciting event.
                   The Dx may be confirmed by cardiac catheterization, with equalization of end diastolic pressures, although volume
                   loading may be necessary to demonstrate this in the patient under medical management. The differentiation between
                   constrictive pericardial disease and restrictive myocardial disease may be difficult, if not impossible, and may coexist
                   in a single patient. After this Dx has been confirmed, surgical pericardiectomy should be undertaken because the
                   outlook without surgical relief is one of gradual, but persistent deterioration. Although surgical mortality remains
                   in the 10–15% range, long-term relief for survivors is good. Because these patients are usually significantly compro-
                   mised hemodynamically, intensive monitoring is indicated. Approach may be through a median sternotomy or left
                   anterolateral thoracotomy. Removal of both visceral and parietal pericardium is essential for relief, but dense adhe-
                   sions of these layers to underlying muscle may make this dissection very difficult, tedious, and bloody, especially if
                   the visceral pericardium and epicardium are involved in the constrictive process. CPB (see p. 348) may be utilized for
                   hemodynamic instability, but it obviously increases bleeding complications. Complete excision from both ventricular

                                                                                                                                                       Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                   surfaces is mandatory. Most periop difficulties evolve from cardiac failure.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: A limited pericardial window, draining fluid into the left hemithorax, may
                   relieve tamponade, but will be of no benefit for a true constrictive process.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Constrictive pericarditis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Median Sternotomy                                              Anterolateral Thoracotomy

                     Position               Supine                                                         Supine, with elevation of left
                                                                                                           hemithorax

                     Incision               Midline                                                        5th interspace

                     Special                TEE; full hemodynamic monitoring; CPB standby                  ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 2 g iv prior to incision, then 1 g q 4 h             ⇐

                     Surgical time          2–5 h, depending on tenacity of visceral peel                  ⇐

                     Closing                Avoid volume overload and cardiac distention. Chronically      ⇐
                       considerations       depressed hearts may require inotropic or mechanical sup-
                                            port (i.e., IABP) postop.

                     EBL                    100–500 mL                                                     ⇐

                     Postop care            ICU; intubated × 4–6 h. Hemodynamic monitoring. Low CO         ⇐
                                            state may persist postop.

                     Mortality              5–15%, predominantly from cardiac failure                      ⇐

                     Morbidity              Persistent CHF: 5%                                             ⇐

                                            Transient phrenic nerve dysfunction: < 1%

                     Pain score             7–10                                                           7–10

===== PAGE 380 =====
380    c h a p t e r 6.1   Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range             10–80 yr (median = 45 yr)

                               Male:Female           2:1

                               Incidence             3–4 patients/yr at tertiary referral center

                               Etiology              Majority unknown. Infectious, radiation, prior cardiac operation, rheumatic pericarditis, amyloid
                                                     deposition.

                               Associated            Restrictive myocardial diseases
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Pericardiectomy is performed most commonly for patients with constrictive pericarditis, whereas pericardial win-
                             dow procedures are used for patients with cardiac tamponade.
     Cardiovascular

                              Respiratory             Restrictive disease may be present 2° fibrosis (e.g., post-TB) or pleural effusions. This may
        Surgery

                                                      impair oxygenation and, if the effusions are significant, may ↓ venous return on institution
                                                      of IPPV → rapid decompensation (↓ CO). Drain prior to surgery.
                                                      Tests: CXR: 3 active disease, fibrosis, effusions, pericardial calcification. Consider ABG,
                                                      PFT, as indicated by CXR and Sx and if time permits.

                              Cardiovascular          Of importance is the presence or absence of a pericardial effusion. A large effusion that
                                                      develops slowly (chronic pericarditis) may cause minimal Sx. Conversely, a small and rap-
                                                      idly forming effusion may → cardiac tamponade. Although the cardiovascular signs for
                                                      both tamponade and constriction are similar (pulsus paradoxus, venous HTN, exagger-
                                                      ated venous pulsations, ↓ BP, tachycardia), it is important to differentiate between them
                                                      because it may affect intraop management. Constrictive pericarditis can be differentiated
                                                      from cardiac tamponade by ECHO, by pulsus paradoxus (frequent, with tamponade; rare,
                                                      with constrictive pericarditis). Kussmaul’s sign (distention of the jugular veins on inspira-
                                                      tion) is rare with tamponade and common with constrictive pericarditis. Electrical alter-
                                                      nans is present with tamponade and absent in constrictive pericarditis. Examination of
                                                      the RV pressure wave form is unchanged in tamponade, but shows a dip and prominent Y
                                                      descent in constrictive pericarditis. Anesthetic management is influenced by the planned
                                                      procedure, the underlying process (constriction or tamponade), and its severity. Clues to
                                                      severity are the physical symptoms and the degree of tachycardia, ↓ BP, and the filling pres-
                                                      sure. (Although it is not possible to give exact figures, a HR of >100 bpm, systolic BP < 100
                                                      mm Hg, and a filling pressure > 15 mm Hg are probably significant.) In addition, it is im-
                                                      portant to assess concurrent cardiac problems: cardiomyopathy, CAD, or valvular disease
                                                      (especially in constrictive disease associated with TB, radiation therapy, or in rheumatoid
                                                      diseases, such as lupus).
                                                      Tests: ECG: 3 low-voltage complexes, electrical alternans. ECHO: 3 pericardial effusion,
                                                      calcification of pericardium, valvular lesions, myocardial function.

                              Gastrointestinal        Chronic hepatic congestion may → ↓ synthetic function (↓ procoagulants). Development
                                                      of ascites may → ↑ intra-abdominal pressure. Because of this and the fact that these are
                                                      sometimes emergency procedures, consider possible full stomach.
                                                      Tests: Consider LFTs; PT; PTT.

                              Renal                   Renal failure may cause pericarditis, and conversely, pericarditis may cause renal fail-
                                                      ure (2° prerenal factors: ↑ venous pressure, ↓ perfusion pressure). This may affect the
                                                      choice of drugs used for anesthesia that depend on renal clearance (particularly muscle
                                                      relaxants).
                                                      Tests: BUN; Cr; consider creatinine clearance; electrolytes.

===== PAGE 381 =====
Pericardiectomy      381

                    Hematologic              Some renal or hepatic conditions may be associated with coagulation disorders. These include
                                             both procoagulant and Plt problems. If possible, any coagulopathy should be corrected
                                             before surgery with FFP, Plt, or both. Consult with a hematologist, if necessary.
                                             Tests: Hb/Hct; PT; PTT; Plt count

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Little or no premedication may be indicated; otherwise, a benzodiazepine (e.g., midazol-
                                             am 0.05–0.2 mg/kg im) may be used. Consider full-stomach precautions: H2-antagonists
                                             (e.g., ranitidine 50 mg iv), metoclopramide (10 mg iv), antacids (e.g., Na citrate 0.3 M 30
                                             mL po).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. An arterial line should be inserted, using liberal amounts of local anesthetic, before
                   induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be critical in the care of these patients, especially during
                   induction. Although it is helpful to have a CVP line before induction for preload monitoring and drug infusion, it
                   is not essential. This line usually is inserted after the patient is intubated. If infused drugs are necessary before the
                   CVP catheter is in place, they can be administered through a separate peripheral iv. Consider pericardiocentesis or

                                                                                                                                                       Cardiovascular
                   pericardial window under local anesthesia prior to induction, as drainage of even a small amount of fluid may im-

                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                   prove the patient’s status dramatically. The considerable manipulation of the heart, extensive dissection, blood loss,
                   dysrhythmias, and unrelieved tamponade make pericardiectomy cases a challenge.

                    Induction                Typically, ketamine (1–2 mg/kg) or etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg) ± narcotic (fentanyl 2–30
                                             mcg/kg), depending on patient status. Consider maintaining spontaneous ventilation in
                                             tamponade patients until drained, as institution of IPPV may result in rapid decompensa-
                                             tion and cardiac arrest due to ↓ ↓ venous return. Otherwise, succinylcholine (1 mg/kg)
                                             with cricoid pressure (full stomach) or vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg) for muscle relaxation. For
                                             unstable patients, may prep and drape and have surgeons standing by before induction of
                                             anesthesia.

                    Maintenance              Narcotic (total fentanyl 5–50 mcg/kg), low-dose volatile agent, midazolam (50–350 mcg/
                                             kg), or a combination of these agents in 100% O2. CO is dependent on maintaining a high
                                             preload to ensure adequate cardiac filling, avoiding and treating bradycardia and preserv-
                                             ing myocardial contractility. The use of inotropes (dopamine, isoproterenol, or epineph-
                                             rine) may be necessary; α-agonists should be avoided but, on occasion, may be needed
                                             to increase coronary perfusion. These anesthetic-considerations apply to both tamponade
                                             and constrictive disease. In patients with acute tamponade, dramatic increases in BP may
                                             occur when the pericardium is opened. Aggressive use of vasodilators and additional anes-
                                             thetic agents may be necessary.

                    Emergence                In general, plan for extubation in the OR in the case of pericardial window and transport to
                                             ICU for postop ventilation 4–24 h following pericardiectomy.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 14 ga (or 7 Fr) × 1–2                During pericardiectomy, anticipate rapid blood loss
                       requirements          UO: 0.5–1 mL/kg/h                        (a major cause of mortality). For this reason, CPB
                                             Warm fluids and humidify gases.          should be available on standby for all pericardiec-
                                             T&C 2–4 U for pericardiectomy.           tomy procedures.

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)               Standard monitors and an A-line are placed before
                                             Arterial line                            induction. CVP (and/or PA line, if indicated), usu-
                                             CVP line                                 ally is placed after intubation. PA catheters aid the
                                             PA catheter                              management of filling pressures, CO, and afterload.
                                             TEE                                      TEE may be useful to gauge filling volume and de-
                                             Urinary catheter                         gree of relief of pericardial constriction.

===== PAGE 382 =====
382    c h a p t e r 6.1     Cardiac Surgery

                              Complications               Cardiac tamponade                           Intrathoracic pressure associated with IPPV may
                                                          Dysrhythmias                                produce a ↓ ↓ CO in these patients (because of ↓
                                                                                                      venous return). Spontaneous ventilation, therefore,
                                                                                                      is preferred until the tamponade is drained.
                                                          Hemorrhage                                  Hemorrhage is not usually a problem unless pene-
                                                          Coagulopathy                                trating trauma is the cause of the tamponade. Once
                                                          Heart failure                               constriction is relieved, myocardial function does
                                                                                                      not return to normal quickly. Inotropes are often
                                                                                                      needed. Due to extensive dissection and hemor-
                                                                                                      rhage, coagulopathies may develop and should be
                                                                                                      treated aggressively.

                              Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                          3 eyes

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications               Hemorrhage                                  Following pericardial window surgery, patients
                                                          Coagulopathy                                improve with the relief of the tamponade. Postperi-
     Cardiovascular

                                                          Ventricular hypofunction                    cardiectomy patients, however, may have a con-
        Surgery

                                                          Dysrhythmias                                tinuation of intraop dysrhythmias and myocardial
                                                          Ischemia                                    depression. Inotropes (e.g., dopamine 5–10 mcg/
                                                                                                      kg/min) may be needed for 24–48 h. Normal car-
                                                                                                      diac function can take 4–6 wk to return.

                              Pain management             Parenteral opioids                          Supplement with benzodiazepine for sedation.

                              Tests                       ECG
                                                          CXR
                                                          ABG
                                                          Coag profile
                                                          Electrolytes

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. DiNardo JA, Zvara DA: Pericardial disease. In: Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd edition. Blackwell Science, Massachusetts:
                                   2008, Chapter 8.
                                2. Hoit BD: Pericardial disease and pericardial tamponade. Crit Care Med 2007; 35(8 Suppl):S355–64.
                                3. Savage RM, Aronson S, Shanewise JS, et al: Intraoperative echocardiography. In: Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG, eds.
                                   Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 237–94.
                                4. Oliver WC Jr, Mauermann WJ, Nuttall GA: Uncommon cardiac diseases. In: Kaplan JA, Reich DL, Savino JS, eds. Kaplan’s Cardiac
                                   Anesthesia: The Echo Era, 6th edition. Saunders/Elsevier St. Louis: 2011, Chapter 22. (Pericardial Heart Disease, p. 706–13).
                                5. Townsley MM, Shelton ML: Anesthetic considerations for patients with pericardial disease. In: Hensley FA Jr, Martin DE,
                                   Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013,
                                   571–6.

                             Suggested Viewing
                             Links are available online to the following videos:
                             Bypass Surgery on a Beating Heart. Arie Blitz, MD, FACC: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MGzyhuCs43o
                             Heart Transplantation: Surgical Technique. Arie Blitz, MD: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lB_2Xvmqxjo
                             Surgical Repair of a Ruptured Type A Aortic Dissection: Arie Blitz, MD.
                             http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O398CeblR3U
                             Mitral Valve Replacement for Rheumatic Heart Disease: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2FBtSysaPU
                             Repair of Ascending Aortic Aneurysm: Arie Blitz, MD: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h_u6SfPhHyc
                             Minimally Invasive Mitral Valve Surgery - Right Thoractomy Approach:
                             http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EnJQh_W3r3A
                             NEJM Procedure: Deployment of an Endovascular Graft in an Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm:
                             http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUpXJBoAoWI

===== PAGE 383 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      6.2 Minimally Invasive
                                            Cardiac Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            James I. Fann, MD
                                            Clayton Kaiser, MD

                                            anesthesiologist
                                            Lawrence C. Siegel, MD

===== PAGE 384 =====
OFF-PUMP AND MINIMALLY INVASIVE CORONARY
                             ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Although coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) without cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was origi-
                             nally proposed more than 6 decades ago, development and advances in CPB resulted in the abandonment of off-pump
                             cardiac surgery by most cardiac centers until the 1990s. The resurgence of off-pump coronary revascularization was
                             due in part to reported adverse effects of CPB, increased comorbidities in an aging population, medical economics,
                             and the development of reliable mechanical stabilization devices (Fig. 6.2-1). From the standpoint of terminology, off-
                             pump coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCAB) applies to all cases of coronary revascularization not using the CPB
                             circuit and although it does not refer directly to the surgical approach, most are via conventional median sternotomy.
                             Minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass grafting (MIDCAB) refers to off-pump coronary revascularization
                             via a small anterolateral thoracotomy incision. Challenges of off-pump coronary revascularization include accurate
                             vascular anastomosis while minimizing hemodynamic perturbations during the procedure. Interrupting flow to the
                             target artery can → regional ischemia, arrhythmias, and hemodynamic instability; displacing the heart to expose lateral
                             or posterior arteries may → ventricular compression and profound hemodynamic compromise. Pharmacologic
                             interventions to decrease HR and ischemic preconditioning may facilitate the anastomosis. Although not fully defined,
     Cardiovascular

                             ischemic preconditioning results from exposure to transient myocardial ischemia and is an endogenous adaptation
        Surgery

                             that may mitigate the effects of subsequent prolonged myocardial ischemia. Thus, mechanically occluding the coro-
                             nary artery for a brief period may confer some protection from ischemic injury associated with coronary occlusion
                             during the anastomosis. Important preop considerations include the number and suitability of distal-target coronary
                             arteries, cardiac and pulmonary status, and other medical comorbidities. The presence of cardiomegaly may limit the
                             degree of intraop cardiac manipulation. The perfusionist is present during the procedure so that rapid conversion to
                             conventional on-pump CABG can be achieved if there is hemodynamic compromise, unsuitable distal target, inability

                                        Figure 6.2-1. Manipulation of the heart and placement of a pressure-plate mechanical
                                        stabilizer is performed in preparation for OPCAB. (Reproduced with permission from
                                        Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG: Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical
                                        Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                      384

===== PAGE 385 =====
Off-Pump and Minimally Invasive Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting          385

                                                              Median sternotomy
                                                                   OPCAB
                                                               (multiple vessels)

                                                                                                Mid-lateral
                                                                                              MIDCAB for left
                                                                                              main stenosis
                                             Bucket handle
                                              right partial
                                              sternotomy
                                                                                                     Anterior
                                                                                                     MIDCAB
                                                                                                   (LIMA→LAD)

                                                                                                    Lateral
                                                                                                   MIDCAB

                                                   Inferior
                                                   MIDCAB

                                                                                                                                                   Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                               Figure 6.2-2. Incision sites for access to various target coronary arteries in MICAB.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG: Cardiac
                               Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                               Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   to expose lateral or posterior target vessels, or regional myocardial ischemia. Occasionally, placement of intraaortic
                   balloon pump intraop may facilitate the off-pump approach in a patient with ischemic cardiomyopathy.
                   For conventional OPCAB, a standard median sternotomy is made (Fig. 6.2-2). If the internal mammary artery
                   (IMA) is to be used as a graft, it is harvested in the usual fashion. The patient is partially heparinized, and an
                   intravenous bolus of lidocaine is given. A sternal retractor with attachments for coronary stabilization is placed
                   (Fig. 6.2-1). If vein grafts are used, the proximal anastomoses may be performed at this point or later, after the
                   completion of the distal anastomoses, using a partial side-biting aortic cross-clamp or automated anastomotic
                   device. During the period of partial aortic clamping, BP typically is lowered to reduce potential complications
                   associated with the use of the clamp. The goal of the operation is to establish adequate perfusion of the most
                   critical vascular bed first. Provided it is a target vessel, the LAD artery is often approached first because an IMA
                   graft (or vein graft) can provide immediate perfusion and requires minimal cardiac manipulation to construct
                   the anastomosis. Mechanical coronary artery stabilizers, based on local myocardial compression (Fig. 6.2-1) or
                   vacuum suction (Fig. 6.2-3) and attached to the retractor, provide stable local epicardial motion restraint, thereby
                   facilitating the anastomosis. After stabilization, the artery is occluded (following a period of ischemic precon-
                   ditioning), and an arteriotomy is made. Equipment that minimizes blood in the operative site includes standard
                   suction attachments, temporary intracoronary shunts, vessel occluders, and “blower-misters” that displace blood
                   by delivering a combination of gas (CO2) and heparinized saline. The distal anastomosis is then performed. The
                   patient is monitored closely at this point for any signs of myocardial ischemia and/or hemodynamic instability.
                   To expose the lateral and posterior target vessels, manipulation of the heart is necessary and may not be well
                   tolerated. During lateral and posterior pericardial suture placement, the surgeon displaces and compresses the
                   heart, resulting in temporary hemodynamic compromise. Ventilation may need to be decreased temporarily to
                   facilitate this maneuver. Additional exposure techniques include the use of an apical suction device to facili-
                   tate cardiac manipulation with potentially less hemodynamic compromise, Trendelenburg position and tilting
                   the operating table to the right, release of right pericardial stay sutures, opening of the right pleura, and incis-
                   ing the right pericardium, and placement of laparotomy sponges. The target vessel is stabilized again, ischemic
                   preconditioning is carried out, and the artery is opened. After construction of the distal anastomosis, the graft
                   is relieved of any residual air before securing the sutures and the proximal anastomosis performed if not already
                   done so as noted earlier. Graft flow is assessed using a Doppler flow probe.

===== PAGE 386 =====
386    c h a p t e r 6.2     Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                          Figure 6.2-3. The Octopus stabilizer (Medtronic, Minneapolis MN) uses a series
                                          of suction cups on two fixed arms that adhere to the epicardial surface and reduce
                                          myocardial motion at the anastomotic site during OPCAB. (Reproduced with
                                          permission from Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG: Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles
                                          and Clinical Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                Supine (Fig. 6.2-4)

                               Incision                Median sternotomy (OPCAB); alternatively, limited left anterolateral thoracotomy (MIDCAB;
                                                       Fig. 6.2-2)

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time           3–4 h

                               Closing                 No special considerations. Patients often can be extubated in OR.
                                 considerations

                               EBL                     200–400 mL (consider using Cell-Saver)

                               Postop care             ICU for cardiac monitoring ± ventilator management; less volume required than with conventional
                                                       CABG.

                               Mortality               0–5% (higher with increasing age)

                               Morbidity               AF: 10–30%
                                                       Pulmonary insufficiency: 3–5%
                                                       Reoperation for bleeding: 1–4%
                                                       Cardiac (e.g., myocardial infarction): 0–4%
                                                       Mediastinal infection: 1–2%
                                                       Neurologic (cerebrovascular accident): 1–2%
                                                       Renal dysfunction: 1–2%
                                                       IABP use: 0–2%

                               Pain score              4–6

===== PAGE 387 =====
Off-Pump and Minimally Invasive Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting          387

                                                                                 CPB

                                                                    • Not primed
                                                                    • Perfusion team available

                                                   • Full prep and drape               • CVP vs PAC (*? Pacing)
                                                   • Femoral a./v. not cannulated      • *? DL ETT

                                                                             OPCAB

                                                                                         *MIDCAB

                                            • Normothermia maintained       • Hemodynamic/ischemia monitoring
                                                                                TEE
                                                                                II, V5 (? V6 position)
                                                                                ? Continuous cardiac output
                                                                            • *? External defibrillation/pacing capability

                                Figure 6.2-4. OR configuration for MICAB. (Reproduced with permission from

                                                                                                                                                    Cardiovascular
                                Estafanous FG, Barash PG, Reves JG: Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                                Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              40 to > 90 yr

                     Male:Female            3:2

                     Incidence              150,000/yr in the United States.

                     Etiology               Multifactorial for atherosclerosis

                     Associated             HTN; diabetes; PVD; COPD; cigarette smoking
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR MICAB/OPCAB
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Preop assessment is similar to that used for standard CABG patients (see p. 356). Relative contraindications for MICAB
                   include low EF, morbid obesity, previous cardiac surgery, AF, and COPD. It is important to know the coronary artery
                   anatomy and the planned surgical procedure and sequence. For example, proximal surgical occlusion of a coronary artery
                   with high-grade distal disease may be poorly tolerated as compared with severe proximal disease with collateralization.

                    Premedication            Adequate control of preop anxiety using midazolam (titrated to effect) may reduce periop
                                             tachycardia.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. For MICAB, selective lung ventilation with DLT, Univent ETT, or bronchial blocker.
                   Unlike CABG on CPB, the anesthetic demands for OPCABG are somewhat different, as CPB will not be provid-
                   ing hemodynamic support. Positioning of the heart for access to the target vessel, as well as mechanical stabiliza-
                   tion of the heart to immobilize the vessel for accurate anastomosis tend to produce hemodynamic compromise.
                   In particular, elevation of the LV apex to allow access to lateral and posterior wall vessels can limit LV filling and
                   obstruct RV outflow tract. In addition, ↓ TV may be necessary to prevent obstruction of visualization. Snares may
                   be placed around the coronary target vessel to create a dry operative field; however, this may provoke regional isch-
                   emia. Many of these changes are assessed by intraop TEE, and they may require resuscitative measures with volume

===== PAGE 388 =====
388    c h a p t e r 6.2   Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                             loading, vasoconstriction, and inotropic support (e.g., dopamine). Interventions on the RCA are particularly prone to
                             arrhythmias, and appropriate antiarrhythmics and pacing should be available. For further discussion, see Intraopera-
                              tive considerations for CABG, p. 357.

                              Induction               As for CABG surgery (see p. 357). For MICAB, these patients will undergo a small anterior
                                                      thoracotomy, and the aim is to extubate them at the end of the procedure or shortly there-
                                                      after. Thus, the dose of narcotic should be moderate (e.g., fentanyl 5–15 mcg/kg). Long-
                                                      acting muscle relaxants should be avoided for the same reason. Consider spinal narcotics
                                                      (e.g., morphine 0.3–0.5 mg).

                              Maintenance             Because early extubation is planned, volatile agents or propofol should be used and the
                                                      overall dose of narcotic reduced. Remifentanil infusion may also be useful.

                              Emergence               For further discussion, see Postoperative Considerations for CABG, p. 359. If the patient
                                                      is not suitable for extubation in the OR, a DLT may be exchanged for a conventional ETT
                                                      (over a tube changer) before transport to ICU.

                              Blood and fluid         See CABG surgery (p. 354).             Without the use of CPB, hemodilution from the
                                 requirements                                                pump prime is avoided.

                              Monitoring              See CABG surgery (p. 354).             Central venous access. PA catheters are useful for
                                                                                              etecting ischemia in patients with poor LV function.
                                                                                             d
     Cardiovascular

                                                                                             If a continuous CO thermodilution c atheter is used,
        Surgery

                                                                                             consideration must be given to the large delays in
                                                                                             data display. ST segment analysis.
                                                      TEE                                    Useful for detecting ischemia and LV dysfunction.
                                                                                             Views may be limited by surgical positioning of the
                                                                                             heart within the chest.

                              Special                  Anticoagulation                       Heparin should be administered before surgical
                                considerations                                               coronary artery occlusion.
                                                       Ischemic preconditioning              Prior to occlusion, ischemic preconditioning may
                                                       Temporary occlusion → ischemia        be accomplished with surgical manipulation and by
                                                                                             pharmacologic means (e.g., isoflurane, sevoflurane).
                                                                                             This is a great opportunity to consider how well
                                                                                             transient ischemia is tolerated. During grafting, the
                                                                                             vessel is temporarily occluded to avoid flooding the
                                                                                             field with blood. The myocardium distal to this may
                                                                                             become ischemic.
                                                       3 ECG, TEE.                           TEE imaging will be affected by surgical mechanical
                                                                                             manipulation of the heart, and ECG voltage may be
                                                                                             decreased.
                                                       Cardiac positioning →↓ CO             Cardiac output may be markedly reduced by the com-
                                                                                             bination of heart positioning and coronary artery
                                                                                             occlusion. Vasoconstriction may be required to main-
                                                                                              tain adequate blood pressure. Patients poorly respon-
                                                                                              sive to vasoconstrictors may have extremely depressed
                                                                                              cardiac output and severe acidosis. Inotropic support
                                                                                              or intraaortic balloon pumping may be necessary.
                                                       Coronary artery shunt                  Surgical placement of a coronary artery shunt may
                                                                                              be necessary. Treatment of rhythm disorders with
                                                                                              pharmacologic agents, pacing, or defibrillation may
                                                                                              be required. The capability to institute CPB rapidly
                                                                                              should exist. A rest period with the heart returned
                                                                                              to the normal position within the chest should be
                                                                                              considered following each anastomosis to restore
                                                                                              cardiac output and permit resolution of acidosis.

                              Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                                       3 eyes

===== PAGE 389 =====
Port-Access Coronary Revascularization               389

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications               See CABG surgery (p. 359).
                                                Premature extubation

                    Pain                        Same as CABG surgery (p. 359).                Intrathecal narcotics or intercostal blocks (MICAB)
                      management                                                              placed at the end of surgery may aid in early
                                                                                              extubation.

                    Tests                       See CABG surgery (p. 359).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Caputo M, Alwair H, Rogers CA, et al: Thoracic epidural anesthesia improves early outcomes in patients undergoing off-
                        pump coronary artery bypass surgery: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Anesthesiology 2011; 114(2):380–90.
                     2. Dorsa AG, Rossi AI, Thierer J, et al: Immediate extubation after off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery in 1,196 consecutive
                        patients: feasibility, safety and predictors of when not to attempt it. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2011; 25(3):431–6.
                     3. Halkos ME, Puskas JD: Teaching off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009; 21:224–8.
                     4. Hemmerling TM, Romano G, Terrasini N, Noiseux N: Anesthesia for off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery. Ann Card
                        Anaesth 2013; 16(1):28–39.
                     5. Huffmyer J, Raphael J: The current status of off-pump coronary bypass surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(1):64–9.
                     6. Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al: Effects of off-pump and on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting at 1 year.

                                                                                                                                                                     Cardiovascular
                        N Engl J Med 2013; 368(13):1179–88.

                                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                     7. Puskas JD, Kilgo PD, Kutner M, et al: Off-pump techniques disproportionately benefit women and narrow the gender disparity
                        in outcomes after coronary artery bypass surgery. Circulation 2007; 116 (Suppl):I-192–9.
                     8. Raja SG, Berg GA: Impact of off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery on systemic inflammation: current best available
                        evidence. J Card Surg 2007; 22:445–55.
                     9. Rajakaruna C, Rogers C, Pike K, et al: Superior haemodynamic stability during off-pump coronary surgery with thoracic epidural
                        anaesthesia: results from a prospective randomized controlled trial. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2013; 16(5):602–7.
                    10. Roosens C, Heerman J, De Somer F, et al: Effects of off-pump coronary surgery on the mechanics of the respiratory system,
                        lung, and chest wall: comparison with extracorporeal circulation. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2430–7.
                    11. Shroyer AL, Grover FL, Hattler B, et al: Veterans affairs randomized on/off bypass (ROOBY) study group. On-pump versus
                        off-pump coronary-artery bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 2009; 361(19):1827–37.
                    12. Sisilio E, Marino MR, Juliano G, et al: Comparison of on pump and off pump coronary surgery: risk factors for neurological
                        outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2007; 31:1076–80.
                    13. Straka Z, Brucek P, Vanek T, et al: Routine immediate extubation for off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting without
                        thoracic epidural analgesia. Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74:1544–7.
                    14. Virmani S, Tempe DK: Anaesthesia for off-pump coronary artery surgery. Ann Card Anaesth 2007; 10(1):65–71.

                   PORT-ACCESS CORONARY REVASCULARIZATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Advances in videoscopic technology have led to less-invasive approaches in the treatment of many gen-
                   eral and thoracic surgical disorders. The development of less-invasive surgery has resulted in alternative and novel
                   approaches to cardiac surgery, including port-access cardiac surgery and off-pump coronary revascularization. The
                   port-access approach was developed in the mid-1990s and is used less frequently in the current setting because of its
                   complexity. With the development of robotic (or total endoscopic) techniques, the port-access technology is being
                   employed as a means to achieve cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest. Using a port-access approach,
                   the surgeon can perform cardiac operations (e.g., CABG) and valve surgery in a motionless, bloodless field through
                   smaller chest incisions. This approach typically relies on peripheral CPB (femoral artery and femoral vein cannula-
                   tion, Fig. 6.2-6). The femoral artery is cannulated with a 19–23 Fr Y-shaped cannula, which permits arterial inflow
                   and insertion of the endoaortic clamp. Venous drainage is provided by the 22–25 Fr cannula, introduced through
                   a femoral vein. Drainage may be augmented by 20–40%, using vacuum-assisted venous drainage or a centrifugal
                   venous drainage pump placed between the venous cannula and the reservoir. The port-access system includes a 10.5 Fr
                   endoaortic “clamp” (EAC), a triple-lumen catheter with an inflatable balloon at its distal end. This clamp is p
                                                                                                                                  ositioned
                   in the ascending aorta using fluoroscopy and TEE guidance. The lumen used for balloon inflation is connected to
                   a manometer to monitor balloon pressure. Cardioplegic solution is delivered through a central lumen, which also
                   acts as an aortic root vent after cardioplegia delivery. A third lumen serves as an aortic root pressure monitor.

===== PAGE 390 =====
390    c h a p t e r 6.2     Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                             In addition, a percutaneous PA venting catheter, placed via the jugular approach, helps in ventricular decompression.
                             The left internal mammary artery (IMA) is harvested under direct vision (Fig. 6.2-7) or with video-assisted thoracos-
                             copy (VAT; Fig. 6.2-8). After peripheral CPB is achieved, the EAC provides aortic occlusion and cardioplegic arrest.
                             Exposure of the lateral and posterior aspects of the heart is easily accomplished in the arrested heart, thereby per-
                             mitting two- and three-vessel coronary revascularization. Notably, if the ascending aorta is accessible, a dual-armed,
                             Y-shaped cannula can be placed directly into the ascending aorta with one arm of the cannula connected to the
                             arterial inflow of the CPB circuit and the other arm as a conduit for introducing the EAC.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: CAD

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                  Supine

                               Incision                  4th interspace, left anterior thoracotomy for CABG; may need to resect 4th rib; may need
                                                         thoracoscopy for IMA harvest.

                               Special instrumentation   TEE and fluoroscopy

                               Unique considerations     CPB used with peripheral femoral cannulation; percutaneous insertion of PA vent and retro-
                                                         grade cardioplegic catheter.

                               Antibiotics               Cefazolin 1–2 g iv at induction
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                               Surgical time             3–5 h

                               Closing considerations    Assess chest wall for hemorrhage; chest tube insertion. Bupivacaine for field block.

                               EBL                       250–500 mL

                                          Figure 6.2-5. Variations in coronary artery bypass and valvular heart surgery, with
                                          minimally invasive techniques. CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass. OPCAB = off-pump
                                          coronary artery bypass. MIDCAB = minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass.
                                          TMR = transmyocardial revascularization. (Redrawn with permission from Estafanous
                                          FG, Barash PG, Reves JG: Cardiac Anesthesia: Principles and Clinical Practice, 2nd
                                          edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 391 =====
Port-Access Coronary Revascularization   391

                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                               Figure 6.2-6. The port-access cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) system. Femoro-
                               femoral (fem-fem) CPB is utilized, and a centrifugal pump augments venous drainage.
                               The endoaortic balloon occlusion catheter is inflated in the ascending aorta, and
                               antegrade cardioplegia is delivered through the central lumen. The endopulmonary
                               vent assists in ventricular decompression. (Redrawn with permission from Fann JI,
                               Pompili MF, Stevens JH, et al: Port-access cardiac surgery with cardioplegic arrest. Ann
                               Thorac Surg 1997; 63:S35–9.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care              ICU monitoring; early extubation; may require inotropic support.

                     Mortality                1–3%, depending on comorbidities

                     Morbidity                Arrhythmias (including atrial fibrillation): 10%
                                              Conversion to sternotomy: 4%
                                              MI: 0–4%
                                              Reoperation for bleeding: 3%
                                              Stroke: 2%
                                              Thrombosis of graft (graft failure): Rare
                                              Fem-fem bypass complications (e.g., arterial dissection): Rare

                     Pain score               1–4

===== PAGE 392 =====
392    c h a p t e r 6.2   Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                                                                            Internal
                                                                            mammary
                                                                            artery

                                                                                 Partially
                                                                                 resected
                                                                                 4th rib

                                                                                 Pericardial
                                                                                 stay
                                                                                 sutures
                                                                                               Figure 6.2-7. The left IMA-to-left
                                                                                               anterior descending artery anastomosis
                                                                                               is performed under direct vision. Stay
     Cardiovascular

                                                                                               sutures suspend the pericardium and
        Surgery

                                                                                               bring the heart into view. (Redrawn with
                                                                                               permission from Acuff TE, Landreneau
                                                                                               RJ, Griffith BP, et al: Minimally invasive
                                                                                               coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann
                                                                                               Thorac Surg 1996; 61:135–7.)

                                                                                         Figure 6.2-8. Dissection and harvesting of
                                                                                         the left IMA using a thoracoscopic approach.
                                                                                         (Redrawn with permission from Acuff TE,
                                                                                         Landreneau RJ, Griffith BP, et al: Minimally
                                                                                         invasive coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann
                                                                                         Thorac Surg 1996; 61:135–7.)

===== PAGE 393 =====
Port-Access Coronary Revascularization             393

                    Table 6.2-1. Common Abbreviations Used in Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery
                    Abbreviation                     Definition
                    MICS                             Minimally invasive cardiac surgery
                    MICAB                            Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass (includes OPCAB, MIDCAB. port-access, and
                                                     mini-sternotomy techniques)
                        OPCAB                        Off-pump coronary artery bypass (“beating heart surgery”: median sternotomy)
                        MIDCAB                       Minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (direct vision, no sternotomy, CPB, or
                                                     cardioplegia)
                        MIDCABG                      Minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass graft (same as MIDCAB)
                        MITACAB                      Minimally invasive thoracoscopically assisted coronary artery bypass
                        VADCAB                       Video-assisted direct coronary artery bypass
                        LAST                         Left anterior small thoracotomy
                    PACAB                            Port-access coronary artery bypass (also called Port-CAB, Port-CABG)
                    TECAB                            Totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass grafting

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                               Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                     Age range                40–80 yr

                     Male:Female              3:2

                     Incidence                < 50,000/yr in the United States.

                     Etiology                 Multifactorial for atherosclerosis

                     Associated               LV dysfunction; COPD; PVD; HTN; diabetes mellitus; cigarette smoking
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Port-Access Procedures, p. 400.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bonatti J, Schachner T, Bonaros N, et al: Technical challenges in totally endoscopic robotic coronary artery bypass grafting.
                        J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2006; 131:146–53.
                     2. Casselman FP, LaMeir M, Jeanmart H, et al: Endoscopic mitral and tricuspid valve surgery after previous cardiac surgery.
                        Circulation 2007; 116 (Suppl): I-270–5.
                     3. Dogan S, Graubitz K, Aybek T, et al: How safe is the port access technique in minimally invasive coronary artery bypass
                        grafting? Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74:1537–43.
                     4. Fann JI, Pompili MF, Stevens JH, et al: Port-access cardiac surgery with cardioplegic arrest. Ann Thorac Surg 1997; 63:S35–9.
                     5. Groh MA, Sutherland SE, Burton HG III, et al: Port-access coronary artery bypass grafting: technique and comparative
                        results. Ann Thorac Surg 1999; 68:1506–8.
                     6. Grossi EA, Groh MA, Lefrak EA, et al: Results of a prospective multicenter study on port-access coronary bypass grafting.
                        Ann Thorac Surg 1999; 68:1475–7.
                     7. Maselli D, Pizio R, Borelli G, et al: Endovascular balloon versus transthoracic aortic clamping for minimally invasive mitral
                        valve surgery: impact on cerebral microemboli. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2006; 5:183–86.
                     8. Murphy DA, Miller JS, Langford DA, et al: Endoscopic robotic mitral valve surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2006; 132:
                        776–81.
                     9. Stevens JH, Burdon TA, Peters WS, et al: Port-access coronary artery bypass grafting: a proposed surgical method. J Thorac
                        Cardiovasc Surg 1996; 111:567–73.
                    10. Subramanian VA, Patel NU, Patel NC, et al: Robotic assisted multivessel minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass
                        with port-access stabilization and cardiac positioning: paving the way for outpatient coronary surgery? Ann Thorac Surg 2005;
                        79:1590–6.
                    11. Walther T, Falk V, Mohr FW: Minimally invasive surgery for valve disease. Curr Probl Cardiol 2006; 31:399–437.
                    12. Woo YJ, Rodriguez E, Atluri P, et al: Minimally invasive, robotic, and off-pump mitral valve surgery. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc
                        Surg 2006; 18:139–47.
                    13. See Suggested Readings for Port-Access Procedures, p. 404.

===== PAGE 394 =====
394    c h a p t e r 6.2    Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                             LIMITED THORACOTOMY AND PORT-ACCESS
                             APPROACHES TO VALVE SURGERY
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Although the field of mitral valve surgery has seen marked advances in biomaterials and innovative repair
                             techniques since the early 1960s, the conventional median sternotomy approach to access and expose the mitral valve
                             has not changed substantially. Because of the progress in video-assisted surgery, a less-invasive approach to cardiac
                             surgery has been developed, and various techniques of mitral valve surgery through limited thoracotomy or upper
                             sternotomy incisions and a port-access technique to achieve cardioplegic arrest are now used in the clinical setting.
                             Limited thoracotomy: The right thoracotomy incision is a less-invasive approach (compared to median sternoto-
                             my) for mitral valve procedures (Fig. 6.2-9). Utilizing hypothermic fibrillatory or cardioplegic arrest, the mitral valve,
                             annulus, and subvalvular apparatus can be visualized directly and the valve procedure carried out. The addition of
                             video-assisted thoracoscopy (VAT) to mitral valve surgery or using robotic technology has resulted in even smaller
                             incisions for these procedures.
                             A “micro-mitral” approach to mitral valve replacement has been described, using VAT through a limited thoracotomy.
                             Peripheral CPB (fem-fem) is used, and a catheter is placed in the coronary sinus for retrograde cardioplegia delivery. An
     Cardiovascular

                             external aortic cross-clamp is introduced through a separate incision in the chest. After achieving cardioplegic arrest,
        Surgery

                             the mitral valve is replaced with thoracoscopic assistance. Proposed advantages of the micro-mitral approach include the
                             avoidance of a sternotomy, with decreased chest-wall trauma and patient discomfort.
                             An alternative partial sternotomy approach to mitral and aortic valve surgery has been described. The 7-cm partial
                             sternotomy permits aortic and right atrial cannulation for CPB. The external aortic cross-clamp is positioned, and a
                             left ventricular vent is placed through the right superior pulmonary vein. Mitral valve exposure is achieved through
                             the dome of the left atrium.
                             Port-access mitral valve surgery: The port-access system has been used successfully in mitral valve surgery
                             via limited thoracotomy incision using special instrumentation or even less-invasive robotic technology. To
                             facilitate dissection and to provide adequate exposure of the left atrium, DLT intubation for OLV is used. Under
                              fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, a retrograde cardioplegia catheter is directed into the coronary sinus via an
                              introducer placed in the jugular vein; a PA-venting catheter is inserted through another jugular vein introducer.
                              A limited right thoracotomy is made, with or without dividing the 4th rib, followed by the placement of a soft-
                              tissue retractor. A separate port is placed in the 6th interspace for introduction of a thoracoscope, if necessary.
                              The pericardium is opened anterior to the phrenic nerve. After systemic heparinization, the femoral artery and
                              vein are cannulated. The endoaortic clamp is introduced through the side limb of the femoral arterial cannula
                              and its tip positioned in the ascending aorta. CPB is initiated and systemic hypothermia achieved. The balloon of
                              the endoaortic clamp is inflated, achieving effective aortic occlusion. Cold blood cardioplegia is delivered using
                              the distal port of the endoaortic clamp; retrograde cardioplegia is administered via the coronary sinus catheter.
                              A left atriotomy is made, and an atrial retractor is placed through a separate port. Valve repair or replacement
                              is carried out using specially designed instruments. Before completion of atriotomy closure, deairing maneu-
                              vers are accomplished. These include temporarily discontinuing pulmonary and aortic root venting, inflating
                              the lungs to displace residual air, and increasing the patient’s blood volume from the venous reservoir. Also, the
                              patient is placed in a Trendelenburg and left lateral decubitus position for further deairing. The balloon of the
                              endoaortic catheter is deflated, and the catheter is left in place for further deairing through the aortic vent lumen.
                              Temporary ventricular pacing wires are placed. After being weaned from CPB, the patient is decannulated and
                              the anticoagulation reversed.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Mitral valve disease

===== PAGE 395 =====
Limited Thoracotomy and Port-Access Approaches to Valve Surgery             395

                                                                                                                                                    Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                                Figure 6.2-9. The right thoracotomy approach with left atriotomy and exposure of the
                                mitral valve area with prosthetic valve in place. (Reproduced with permission from Tribble
                                CG, Killinger WA Jr, Harman PK, et al: Anterolateral thoracotomy as an alternative to repeat
                                median sternotomy for replacement of the mitral valve. Ann Thorac Surg 1987; 43:380–2.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                                      Port-Access/Limited Thoracotomy

                     Position                         Supine, with right side slightly elevated

                     Incision                         4th interspace limited right thoracotomy; ports for possible thoracoscopy; port for
                                                      atrial retractor.

                     Special instrumentation          Specially designed retractors; TEE and fluoroscopy for guiding placement of endopul-
                                                      monary vent, retrograde cardioplegia catheter, and endoaortic clamp

                     Unique considerations            CPB is achieved with peripheral femoral cannulation; placement of endopulmonary
                                                      vent; placement of retrograde cardioplegia catheter; may require conversion to open
                                                      procedure.

                     Antibiotics                      Cefazolin 1–2 g iv at induction

                     Surgical time                    3–5 h

                     Closing considerations           Assess chest wall for hemorrhage.

                     EBL                              250–500 mL

                     Postop care                      ICU monitoring; early extubation; may require inotropic support.

                     Mortality                        1–6%, depending on comorbidities (lower for mitral valve repairs)

===== PAGE 396 =====
396    c h a p t e r 6.2    Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Morbidity                         AF:10–40%
                                                                 Chest-wall hemorrhage: 2–9%
                                                                 Stroke: 1–3%
                                                                 Conversion to sternotomy: 2%
                                                                 Vascular injury: Rare
                                                                 Pneumonia
                                                                 Renal failure

                               Pain score                        1–4

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                         40–70 yr

                               Male:Female                       1:1

                               Incidence                         < 20,000/yr in the United States.

                               Etiology                          Myxomatous mitral valve; rheumatic valve disease; endocarditis; ischemic (papillary
     Cardiovascular

                                                                 muscle dysfunction); mitral annular calcification
        Surgery

                               Associated conditions             Pulmonary HTN; atrial arrhythmias; CAD; aortic valve disease; tricuspid regurgitation

                             Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Minimally invasive approaches to aortic valve replacement include transvenous (antegrade), transarte-
                             rial (retrograde), and transapical (transthoracic). These minimally invasive valve replacement procedures are usually
                             performed in the cath lab, may only require sedation (transvenous approach), and can be accomplished without CPB.
                             Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVI) is becoming the preferred treatment for patients with severe aortic
                             stenosis who are otherwise at high risk for not surviving open surgery. An alternative treatment, percutaneous bal-
                             loon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV) has a high rate of restenosis and is now infrequently performed except to provide
                             temporary relief while patients await more definitive treatment and during TAVI in preparation for valve placement.
                             Transcatheter approaches to mitral valve replacement have been slower to develop, in part because of the irregular
                             shape of the valve orifice and the absence of heavy calcification to help anchor the prosthetic valve.
                             Transvenous aortic or mitral valve replacement: Under sedation, a guide wire is inserted through a femoral vein
                             sheath into the right atrium. The atrial septum is punctured allowing the guide wire to enter the left atrium to cross the
                             mitral valve and aortic valve, where it is snared by a device in the aorta introduced via the femoral artery (Fig. 6.2-10).
                             The atrial septal puncture and the diseased valve are dilated, then the compressed prosthetic valve is positioned
                             and deployed during rapid ventricular pacing which is used to ↓ LV stroke volume and the risk of unwanted device
                             movement. This approach has largely been replaced by transarterial and transapical approaches for the aortic valve.
                             Transarterial aortic valve replacement: Usually under GETA, a guide wire is inserted from a femoral artery through
                             the aorta (or directly into the aorta through the chest wall) and across the aortic valve. As in the transvenous
                             approach, the diseased valve is dilated then the compressed prosthetic valve is positioned and deployed (Fig. 6.2-11)
                             during rapid ventricular pacing to ↓LV stroke volume and the risk of unwanted device movement. Although the
                             direct arterial approach to the valve has some advantages, patients with small, tortuous, or diseased iliac and femo-
                             ral arteries may not be suitable candidates for distal arterial access, and more proximal access to the aorta may be
                             obtained through a mini-thoracotomy.

===== PAGE 397 =====
Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures               397

                                Figure 6.2-10. Transseptal (transvenous) approach to mitral valve (and aortic valve).

                                                                                                                                                              Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                                 Surgery
                   Transapical aortic valve replacement: Under GETA, a cardiothoracic surgeon exposes the LV apex through an
                   anterolateral intercostal incision. Purse-string sutures are preplaced around the guide wire entry site at the apex, and
                    the beating heart is punctured with insertion of a guide wire across the aortic valve. A sheath is placed, the diseased
                    valve is dilated then the compressed prosthetic valve is positioned and deployed (Fig. 6.2-12) during rapid epicardial
                    pacing to ↓ LV stroke volume and the risk of unwanted device movement. The sheath is removed and the myocar-
                   dium closed using the preplaced sutures.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                          Transvascular                                               Transapical

                     Position             Supine                                                      ⇐

                     Incision             Vascular sheaths                                            ⇐ + Left mini-thoracotomy

                     Unique               Anticoagulation (100 U heparin/kg) CPB standby (addi-       ⇐
                       considerations     tional heparin will be necessary for CPB) Inotropic/vaso-
                                          pressor support may be necessary. TEE may be useful.

                     Key procedural       Retrograde placement of pigtail catheter in the noncoro-    ⇐
                       steps [with        nary sinus (serves as landmark to depict the level of the
                       typical            aortic annulus). [Intraventricular position with provoca-
                       complications]     tion of arrhythmias]
                                          —                                                           Anterolateral mini-thoracotomy, Pericardi-
                                                                                                      otomy [Pneumothorax, Lung injury, Pleural
                                                                                                      bleeding]
                                          Placement of temporary transvenous (transjugular or         Placement of epicardial pacemaker elec-
                                          transfemoral) pacemaker in the right ventricle, testing     trodes, testing of capture [Bleeding, pacer
                                          of capture [ventricular perforation by pacemaker, pacer     induced hemodynamic deterioration]
                                          induced hemodynamic deterioration]
                                          —                                                           Placement of purse-string sutures at the
                                                                                                      anterolateral left ventricular wall, myocardi-
                                                                                                      al puncture, placement of delivery sheath.
                                                                                                      [bleeding, tamponade, air embolism, MV
                                                                                                      damage]
                                          Retrograde placement of a guidewire across the aortic       Antegrade placement of a guidewire
                                          valve. [dysrhythmias]                                       across the aortic valve [dysrhythmias]

===== PAGE 398 =====
398    c h a p t e r 6.2    Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                   Transvascular                                                 Transapical

                               Key procedural      Start of rapid ventricular pacing (160–220 bpm) to en-        ⇐
                                 steps [with       sure a stable balloon position during BAV. [Hemodynamic
                                 typical           deterioration, shock, myocardial ischemia,↑ MR, VF]
                                 complications]    BAV [Calcific embolism with myocardial or cerebral            ⇐
                                 (Cont’d)          infarction, AR, rupture of aortic annulus/LVOT, aortic
                                                   dissection, AV block]
                                                   Recovery                                                      Recovery
                                                   Retrograde placement of transcatheter aortic delivery         Antegrade placement of transcatheter
                                                   catheter [dysrhythmias]                                       aortic delivery catheter. [dysrhythmias]
                                                   Start of rapid ventricular pacing (160–220 bpm) to            ⇐
                                                   ensure a stable device position during valve deploy-
                                                   ment. [Hemodynamic deterioration, shock, myocardial
                                                   ischemia,↑ MR, VF]
                                                   Valve positioning and deployment. [Calcific embolism          ⇐
                                                   with myocardial or cerebral infarction, coronary flow ob-
                                                   struction, valve embolization/malposition/failure, paraval-
                                                   vular or transvalvular regurgitation, MV damage, rupture
                                                   of aortic annulus/LVOT, aortic dissection, AV block]
     Cardiovascular

                                                   Recovery and assessment of regular valve position and         ⇐
        Surgery

                                                   function
                                                   Removal of delivery sheath using a vascular closure de-       Retrieval of delivery sheath, closure of
                                                   vice or surgical closure; crossover ileofemoral angiogram     apical puncture site and pericardium;
                                                   to assess hemostasis and patency. [bleeding, dissection,      closure of surgical incision. [bleeding,
                                                   ischemia, atrioventricular fistula, pseudoaneurysm]           dysrhythmias]

                               Antibiotics         Cefazolin 1–2 g iv                                            ⇐

                               Surgical time       1–3 h                                                         2–4 h

                               Closing             Assess entry sites for hemorrhage                             ⇐
                                 considerations

                               EBL                 Usually <200 mL                                               ⇐

                               Postop care         Short ICU stay                                                Short ICU stay and may remain intubated.

                               Mortality           30 day: 5–11% 1 yr: 18–27%                                    ⇐

                               Morbidity           MI (<72 h): 0.2–2%                                            ⇐
                                                   Stroke (<30 d): 4–9%
                                                   Renal injury: 16–26%
                                                   Bleeding: 12–21%
                                                   Vascular complications: 14–24%
                                                   Moderate-severe AR: 5–10%

                               Pain score          2–3 (6–8 if transaortic approach)                             6–8

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                            65–90

                               Male:Female                          3:2

                               Incidence                            1.3–4% of the population >65 yo

                               Etiology                             Degenerative calcification most common in this age group

                               Associated conditions                CAD (50%); HTN (40%); CHF, AF. Aortic regurgitation, mitral valve disease, von
                                                                    Willebrand disease with impaired platelet function is common with severe AS.

===== PAGE 399 =====
Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures   399

                                               Crossing native valve             Expand percutaneous

                                                                                                                                     Cardiovascular
                                                                                        valve

                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                                  Figure 6.2-11. TAVI—Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation: retrograde approach.

                                                                                Figure 6.2-12. Transapical approach to
                                                                                aortic valve.

===== PAGE 400 =====
400    c h a p t e r 6.2       Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Patients presenting for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) are typically too frail to successfully undergo
                             open surgical valve replacement. In addition to the problems associated with critical AS, these patients often have
                             severe comorbidities including pulmonary hypertension, significant MR or TR, COPD, and renal disease that may
                             challenge anesthetic management. TAVR is not currently recommended in patients with active endocarditis, throm-
                             bi in the left ventricle or ascending aorta, high risk of intraprocedure coronary ostium occlusion, or a valve annulus
                             outside the range of 18–29 mm. For a complete preop discussion of AS, see Anesthetic Considerations for Aortic
                             Valve Replacement, p. 362.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GETA is used for a transapical approach and is often used for transvascular approaches, al-
                             though sedation may be appropriate for some patients (↓ hemodynamic compromise, faster recovery). Although CPB
                             is not used in these patients, there are brief periods of rapid ventricular pacing (RVP) at 160–220 bpm that will produce
                             a functional asystole (facilitates balloon and valve placement). For a complete discussion of intraop management in AS,
                             see Anesthetic Considerations for Aortic Valve Replacement, p. 362. A right radial art line, external defibrillation pads
                             and standard monitors should be placed before induction. A multilumen CVC and TEE should be inserted postinduc-
                             tion. Maintain hemodynamic stability and coronary perfusion by guided volume repletion, avoiding hypotension or
     Cardiovascular

                             tachycardia, and preserving a sequential A-V rhythm. Before the start of RVP, ensure that MAP is >75 mm Hg (systolic
        Surgery

                             BP >120 mm Hg) using vasopressors as necessary. Hypertension increases the risks of ventricular rupture.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE
                             After GETA most patients can be extubated in the procedure room. For most patients, hemodynamics are improved
                             immediately following valve replacement. However, diastolic dysfunction often persists and may worsen in the
                             postop period, requiring continued hemodynamic support. Hypertension should be avoided to decrease the risk of
                             ventricular rupture. In patients requiring a minithoracotomy, intercostal nerve blocks placed through the incision by
                             the surgeons will provide good pain relief. Alternatively, paravertebral catheters can be used to infuse local anesthetic
                             for continuous analgesia.

                             SUGGESTED READING
                                1. Billings FT IV, Kodali SK, Shanewise JS: Transcatheter aortic valve implantation: anesthetic considerations. Anesth Analg
                                   2009; 108(5):1453–62.
                                2. Cheng DC, Martin J, Lal A, et al: Minimally invasive versus conventional open mitral valve surgery: a meta-analysis and
                                   systematic review. Innovations (Phila) 2011; 6(2):84–103.
                                3. Cheung A, Al-Lawati A: Transcatheter mitral valve-in-valve implantation: current experience and review of literature. Curr
                                   Opin Cardiol 2013; 28(2):181–6.
                                4. Kodali SK, Williams MR, Smith CR, et al: PARTNER Trial Investigators. Two-year outcomes after transcatheter or surgical
                                   aortic-valve replacement. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366(18):1686–95.
                                5. Lehr EJ, Rodriguez E, Chitwood WR: Robotic cardiac surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24(1):77–85.
                                6. Schmitto JD, Mokashi SA, Cohn LH: Past, present, and future of minimally invasive mitral valve surgery. J Heart Valve Dis
                                   2011; 20(5):493–8.

                                   
                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR PERCUTANEOUS AND
                                   PORT-ACCESS PROCEDURES
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             As with all anesthetic procedures, the use of the port-access system should not be attempted without appropriate
                             training. Catheter placement and monitoring relies on TEE and/or fluoroscopy. The evaluation of the patient for
                             port-access cardiac surgery should parallel that of patients having conventional cardiac surgery. (For mitral valve
                             surgery, see p. 365; for CABG surgery, see p. 356.) There are, however, a number of specific conditions that preclude
                             the use of the port-access system:
                                      1. Aortic regurgitation (AR): Although mild-to-moderate AR is not a contraindication, it may make the delivery
                                          of antegrade cardioplegia via the endoaortic clamp catheter (EAC) problematic; therefore, insertion of the
                                          endocoronary sinus catheter (ESC) is very important. Severe AR is a contraindication.

===== PAGE 401 =====
Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures             401

                         2. Atherosclerotic disease of the aorta: Perfusion may be associated with embolization of atheromatous plaques
                             (particularly pedunculated lesions).
                         3. PVD: Femoral bypass may be associated with retrograde arterial dissection. PVD and tortuous femoral and
                             iliac vessels are contraindications to use of femoral arterial cannulation.
                         4. Thoracic aortic aneurysm/Marfan syndrome: Port-access procedures require passage of the EAC into the thorac-
                             ic aorta and inflation of the EAC balloon; therefore, aneurysms or a weakened aortic wall are contraindications.
                         5. Scarring of the pleural cavity (e.g., chest trauma, previous thoracotomy) may make surgical access difficult
                             although the surgical approach may be desirable in the patient with previous median sternotomy.
                         6. Inability to obtain TEE or fluoroscope imaging because monitoring and placement of catheters relies on
                             imaging.
                   Preop evaluation should focus on the underlying pathophysiology (valvular disease vs CAD). In addition, the follow-
                   ing aspects should be considered:

                    Respiratory               OLV is used to facilitate surgical exposure; thus, evaluation of patients with severe lung
                                              disease may include CXR, ABG, PFTs (see Thoracic Surgery, pp. 277–344).

                    Cardiovascular            The vascular system should be evaluated with respect to insertion of the catheters and can-
                                              nulae for endovascular CPB. Severity of arterial occlusive or atherosclerotic disease should
                                              be evaluated (embolization/dissection risk). The possible presence of a persistent left SVC
                                              should be considered.

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                              Tests: CXR; aortography; iliofemoral arteriography; vascular MRI/MRA; vascular ultra-

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                              sound; TEE

                    Premedication             As for the underlying condition. Usually, a mild anxiolytic (e.g., midazolam 1–3 mg iv) is
                                              sufficient.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA (DLT or BB). Anesthetic technique depends on the underlying pathophysiology (e.g.,
                   valvular disease vs CAD). Early extubation and postop pain relief can be facilitated by using intrathecal narcotics
                   (e.g., Duramorph 10 mcg/kg intrathecal) injected before induction.

                    Induction                    Typically, induction can be accomplished with etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) or propofol
                                                 (0.5–2 mg/kg), with fentanyl (5–20 mcg/kg) and pancuronium or vecuronium (0.1 mg/
                                                 kg). The overall length of port-access procedures is similar to or slightly longer than
                                                 conventional approaches, so that a long-acting muscle relaxant can be used. Intubation
                                                 is accomplished with a DLT, and its placement is checked by auscultation or bronchos-
                                                 copy. A bronchial blocker or Univent tube may also be used to provide selective lung
                                                 ventilation.

                    Maintenance                  With the goal of early extubation, it is important to avoid oversedation. The use of volatile
                                                 agents or a propofol infusion (25–100 mcg/kg/min) before, during, and after CPB will facili-
                                                 tate early extubation. During dissection of the IMA or exposure of the left atrium, OLV is
                                                 needed.

                    Emergence                    At the end of the procedure, intercostal blocks with ropivacaine or bupivacaine may
                                                 be placed, and infiltration of the skin incision also is helpful. Extubation in the OR may
                                                 be appropriate for stable patients. Alternatively, the patient is transported to ICU and
                                                 ventilated. The DLT may be exchanged for a single-lumen tube when postop mechanical
                                                 ventilation is required.

                    Special                      The port-access system consists of CPB with venous drainage via an endovenous drain
                       considerations:           (EVD) and an aortic or femoral arterial return cannula, which is Y-ed to accept the
                    Placement/                   EAC. These are placed by the surgeon with the aid of fluoroscopy and/or TEE. Addi-
                       monitoring of             tional drainage of the right side of the heart is accomplished via an endopulmonary vent
                       endocardio-               (EPV) placed by the anesthesiologist. Immediately after intubation and before CVP
                       pulmonary                 insertion, a TEE exam should be performed to exclude any contraindication to endo-CPB
                       system                     (e.g., severe AR, aortic atheromatous disease, aortic aneurysm); the size of the

===== PAGE 402 =====
402    c h a p t e r 6.2   Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                              Special                   ascending aorta should be measured (aids the surgeon in inflation of the aortic balloon);
                                 considerations:        and the coronary sinus should be identified to aid placement of the ESC (coronary sinus
                              Placement/                catheter). The right IJ vein is then cannulated with two sheaths (9 Fr for EPV and 11 Fr
                                 monitoring of          for the ESC). Cardioplegia is delivered in an anterograde fashion via the EAC or retro-
                                 endocardio-            grade via an ESC, also placed by the anesthesiologist (Fig. 6.2-2).
                                 pulmonary
                                 system
                                 (cont’d)

                              Placement of ESC          The ESC can be placed with fluoroscopy and/or TEE. The coronary sinus is identified
                                                        on TEE (transverse view of the right atrium or longitudinal bicaval view). Prior to place-
                                                        ment, the patient should be partially anticoagulated with 70 U/kg of heparin. The ESC
                                                        is placed through the 11 Fr sheath. After the tip of the catheter engages the coronary
                                                        sinus, the catheter is advanced either directly or over a guiding wire until the occlusion
                                                        balloon is 2–4 cm inside the sinus. Position is confirmed by inflating the balloon and
                                                        obtaining ventricularization of the pressure tracing. Careful note should be taken of
                                                        the volume of fluid required to occlude the coronary sinus (1–2 mL) so that overinfla-
                                                        tion and possible coronary sinus trauma do not occur. Contrast injection will define
                                                        the correct positioning of the ESC in the coronary sinus. Care should be taken to avoid
                                                        injecting contrast too quickly, thus pushing the ESC out of the coronary sinus. A time
     Cardiovascular

                                                        limit (20–30 min) should be set to pass this catheter, as repeated attempts increase the
        Surgery

                                                        risk of cardiac injury (e.g., cardiac perforation).

                              Placement of EPV          The EPV (pulmonary vent) is positioned by advancing the catheter, using balloon flota-
                                                        tion with pressure monitoring (as with a Swan-Ganz catheter). Fluoroscopy and/or TEE
                                                        also may be used.

                              Placement of EVD          The EVD (venous drain) cannula is placed via the femoral vein into the right atrium over
                                                        a guide wire. Fluoroscopy or TEE is used to ensure that the wire enters the SVC before
                                                        advancing the EVD into position. The tip of the EVD should be at the SVC/RA junction
                                                        or just inside the SVC.

                              Placement of              The aorta may be cannulated with a “Y” cannula with an incising introducer. For femoral
                                 arterial cannula       arterial cannulation, a guide wire is advanced under fluoroscopy and no resistance to
                                                        its passage should be felt. The guide wire is advanced into the descending aorta and its
                                                        intraluminal position confirmed on TEE prior to advancing the aortic return cannula-
                                                        tion into its final position. The perfusionist should confirm normal line pressures with a
                                                        test bolus of fluid and 3 that normal arterial pulsation is present. These precautions will
                                                        decrease the likelihood of arterial dissection.

                              Placement of EAC          The EAC (endoaortic clamp) may be advanced via the “Y” arterial cannula. For a fem-
                                                        oral arterial cannula, the EAC is advanced over a guide wire with imaging into the
                                                        ascending aorta so that the tip of the catheter is just proximal to the sinotubular ridge
                                                         (2–3 cm above the aortic valve). Position is confirmed by contrast injection and/or
                                                         TEE. It is also useful to identify the takeoff of the innominate artery in relation to the
                                                         balloon. Migration of the balloon proximally or distally can occur, and thus, its posi-
                                                         tion needs to be monitored. Monitoring of the pressure in the aortic root via this cath-
                                                         eter should show that the mean aortic root pressure is the same as mean radial artery
                                                         pressure prior to the initiation of bypass.

                              Sequence of               After initiation of bypass, the anesthesiologist should observe the descending aorta
                                events during           to exclude aortic dissection and open the EPV to allow venting. EPV pressures dur-
                                endo-CPB                ing bypass should be negative (positive pressures may indicate inadequate decompres-
                                                        sion of the heart or kinking of the EPV). Once adequate CPB is established and the
                                                        heart is drained, the EAC balloon can be inflated (balloon pressure = 250–350 mm Hg).
                                                        Occlusion of the aorta is confirmed by a differential between the radial and aortic root
                                                        pressures and by an aortic root contrast injection. Antegrade cardioplegia is delivered
                                                        via the EAC with careful monitoring to ensure that the balloon is not displaced distally,

===== PAGE 403 =====
Transcatheter Valve Replacement Procedures                403

                    Sequence of       thus occluding the innominate artery (see Monitoring of endo-CPB: regional perfusion,
                      events during   below). After cardioplegic arrest, retrograde cardioplegia may be delivered via the ESC,
                      endo-CPB        and the left side of the heart may be vented via the EAC. Avoid overventing, high systemic
                      (cont’d)        pressures, or high CPB flow, which could displace the EAC toward the aortic valve. Initia-
                                      tion of retrograde cardioplegia should begin with a low flow to avoid displacing the ESC,
                                      followed by inflation of the ESC balloon until the pressure in the coronary sinus just starts
                                      to rise, indicating coronary sinus occlusion. No further inflation of the balloon should
                                      take place. Normal coronary sinus perfusion pressure is < 40 mm Hg. After retrograde
                                      cardioplegia is delivered, the ESC balloon is deflated. Once the surgery is completed, the
                                      EAC balloon is deflated (after deairing procedures, as needed); the heart is reperfused;
                                      and the EAC is removed. Prior to weaning from CPB, mobility of the ESC and EPV should
                                      be assessed in mitral procedures to ensure that they have not been incorporated in the
                                      atrial suture line. Weaning from bypass is routine. The ESC should be removed prior to
                                      heparin reversal, and the EPV can be replaced with a pulmonary artery catheter, if needed.

                    Blood and fluid   As for underlying condition:
                       requirements     For mitral valve surgery, see
                                        p. 368.
                                        For CABG, see p. 354.
                                      As for underlying condition:            Special monitoring considerations for port-

                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                    Monitoring
                                       For mitral valve surgery, see         access are discussed below. External defibrillator

                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                        p. 368.                               pads should be placed on all patients.
                                         For CABG, see p. 354.

                    Positioning       Supine
                                      Roll under left chest for CABG and
                                      under right chest for mitral valve

                    Monitoring of     Regional perfusion                      Distal migration of the EAC (innominate artery
                      endo-CPB                                                occlusion → ↓ cerebral blood flow) is possible,
                                                                              especially while cardioplegia is being delivered
                                                                              when pressure in the aortic root exceeds that
                                                                              in the systemic arterial system. Monitoring for
                                                                              regional perfusion includes:
                                                                              (1) Right-sided arterial pressure—radial, brachi-
                                                                              al, or axillary. The pump-induced artifact may be
                                                                              of use if roller heads are being used.
                                                                              (2) Bilateral arterial lines—right-sided, plus a sec-
                                                                              ond line in the left radial or in the femoral vessels
                                                                              to allow comparison.
                                                                              (3) TEE—EAC visible in the ascending aorta
                                                                              proximal to the innominate artery.
                                                                              (4) Transcranial or carotid artery Doppler.
                                                                              (5) Fluoroscopy
                                      Proximal EAC balloon migration          Most likely to occur during aortic root venting
                                                                              when the systemic pressure exceeds aortic root
                                                                              pressure. Monitored by TEE.
                                      Cardiac decompression                   TEE can be useful in monitoring for adequate
                                                                              decompression of the heart.
                                      EAC balloon pressure                    This is usually monitored by the perfusionist and
                                                                              ranges from 250–550 mm Hg. Decreases in pres-
                                                                              sure may be 2° proximal migration of the balloon
                                                                              into a wider area of the ascending aorta, rupture of
                                                                              the balloon, or prolapse into the left ventricle. Loss
                                                                              of balloon occlusion is indicated by blood in the
                                                                              surgical field, return of cardiac activity, cardiac dis-
                                                                              tension, increased root venting, and TEE evidence.

===== PAGE 404 =====
404    c h a p t e r 6.2      Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery

                              Monitoring of                 Aortic root pressure                       < 80 mm Hg while giving cardioplegia; 0–10
                                endo-CPB                                                               mm Hg during venting. Overventing should be
                                (cont’d)                                                               avoided, as should venting when the left side of
                                                                                                       the heart is open, to avoid drawing air into the
                                                                                                       aortic root.
                                                            Intracardiac air                           TEE is very useful for determining that adequate
                                                                                                       deairing of the heart has occurred.

                              Complications of              Retrograde aortic dissection
                                endo-CPB                    Coronary sinus damage
                                                            EAC balloon migration
                                                            EAC balloon rupture                        Especially 2° sutures placed in the mitral valve
                                                                                                       annulus.
                                                            Retained EPV in atrial suture line         It is important that the surgeon 3 the chest wall
                                                            Chest-wall hemorrhage                      before closure.
                                                            Limb ischemia                              May follow femoral cannulation.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE
                                                         As for the primary procedure               See mitral valve surgery (p. 359) or CABG (p. 359).
     Cardiovascular

                              Complications
                                                         Low CO
        Surgery

                                                         Chest-wall hemorrhage
                                                         Problems associated with periph-
                                                         eral cannulation (e.g., dissection,
                                                         embolization)
                                                         Perivalvular leak
                                                         Heart block

                              Pain                       Parenteral narcotics                       Pain control is important to facilitate early extuba-
                                management               NSAIDs                                     tion. Intrathecal narcotics and/or intercostal blocks
                                                                                                    with wound infiltration may be useful.

                              Tests                      ECG
                                                         Electrolytes
                                                         ABG

                             Suggested Reading
                                1. Grossi EA, Galloway AC, LaPietra A, et al: Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery: a 6-year experience with 714 patients.
                                   Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74:660–4.

===== PAGE 405 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      6.3 Vascular Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           James I. Fann, MD
                                           R. Scott Mitchell, MD
                                           Clayton Kaiser, MD
                                           Stephen T. Kee, MD (Endovascular stent-grafting)
                                           Michael D. Dake, MD (Endovascular stent-grafting)

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Pieter J. A. van der Starre, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 406 =====
CAROTID ENDARTERECTOMY (VASCULAR)
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) continues to be one of the commonly performed open vascular surgery
                             procedures in the United States, even as carotid stenting is being employed as an alternative approach. Because of
                             presumed microemboli from stenotic/ulcerated plaques at the carotid bifurcation, CEA is an effective procedure to
                             reduce the risk of subsequent stroke. The NASCET Collaborators determined, in a prospective, randomized, blinded
                             trial, that CEA is more effective than medical therapy for symptomatic patients with internal carotid artery nar-
                             rowing between 60% and 90%. Symptoms are usually hemispheric (contralateral, upper or lower extremity paresis
                             or numbness) or retinal (unilateral monocular blindness). Symptoms may be transient (TIA or reversible ischemic
                             neurological deficit [RIND]) or permanent (CVA). The Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS) has
                             shown benefit from prophylactic CEA in asymptomatic patients with > 60% stenosis of the internal carotid artery. The
                             Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial 1(ACST-1) is a recent randomized study of patients assigned to immediate CEA
                             or deferral of any carotid artery procedure. Recruiting patients between 1993 to 2003 and following until 2006–08,
                             this study shows that successful CEA for asymptomatic patients younger than 75 years of age reduces 10-year stroke
                             risks, particularly for disabling or fatal strokes. Further studies will provide information on the risks from unoperated
                             carotid lesions (or optimal medical management), on future stroke risks, and on 10-year survival rates.
     Cardiovascular

                             Although some surgeons routinely prefer local anesthesia, most prefer GA with careful hemodynamic monitoring
        Surgery

                             because of the frequent concomitant CAD. The carotid artery is approached through an oblique neck incision along
                             the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. After division of the common facial vein, the carotid sheath is
                             opened and the carotid artery is exposed, avoiding injury to the phrenic, vagus, ansa hypoglossi, and hypoglossal nerves
                             (Fig. 6.3-1). After controlling the internal, external, and common carotid arteries, heparin is administered, and the internal,
                             external, and common carotid arteries are clamped sequentially. To maintain carotid perfusion, an indwelling shunt may
                             be utilized (Fig. 6.3-2B), at the discretion of the surgeon. During clamping mean arterial blood pressure is maintained at
                             approximately 100 mm Hg with phenylephrine infusion or boluses. An endarterectomy plane is established proximally
                             (Fig. 6.3-2C) and developed distally into both the external and internal branches, with establishment of a fine tapered end
                             point. After removal of all thrombus, loose smooth-muscle fibers and endothelium, the arteriotomy is closed, with or
                             without a patch, the artery flushed, and flow restored. The incision is closed after meticulous hemostasis has been ensured.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Carotid artery disease

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                     Supine with neck extended and turned away from the side of the lesion

                               Incision                     Anterior to sternocleidomastoid from earlobe to base of neck or curvilinear in a skin crease
                                                            over the carotid bifurcation

                               Special                      EEG monitor; ± shunt
                                 instrumentation

                               Unique                       Capability to measure stump pressure may be needed. This can be accomplished by a high-
                                 considerations             pressure arterial line passed off the field to a pressure transducer. Avoid ↓ BP during carotid
                                                            cross-clamping. An indwelling shunt may be utilized to restore carotid perfusion. Heparin 5000–
                                                            10,000 U 5 min prior to cross-clamping, and protamine may be given after restoration of flow.

                               Antibiotics                  Cefazolin 1 g iv at induction of anesthesia

                               Surgical time                Carotid cross-clamp: 30 min
                                                            Total operating time: 90 min

                               Closing                      To assess the patient’s neurologic status, it is best to be able to awaken and e  xtubate the
                                 considerations             patient at the conclusion of the procedure. Avoidance of HTN is also critical during this
                                                             period because the endarterectomy tissues are thin and friable.

                               EBL                          100–200 mL

                               Postop care                  ICU × 12–24 h; BP control; cardiac monitoring

                               Mortality                    1%

                      406

===== PAGE 407 =====
Carotid Endarterectomy (Vascular)      407

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity                 MI: Major cause of postop mortality
                                               Cranial nerve injury (recurrent and superior laryngeal nerves): 39%
                                               Restenosis
                                                 Asymptomatic: 9–12%

                                                  Symptomatic: < 3%
                                                  Neurologic complications: < 2%
                                                  Hemorrhage: 1%
                                                  False aneurysm: < 0.5%

                     Pain score                3–5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              55–80 yr

                     Male:Female            3:1

                     Incidence              Second most common vascular surgical procedure (after AAA repair)

                     Etiology               Arteriosclerosis; fibromuscular dysplasia

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                     Associated             Significant CAD coexists with carotid artery disease in at least 30% of patients, necessitating
                       conditions           careful cardiac and hemodynamic monitoring.

                             Figure 6.3-1. Exposure of the carotid bifurcation. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-
                             Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                             Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 408 =====
408    c h a p t e r 6.3        Vascular Surgery

                                            Internal carotid
                                            artery

                                                     External carotid
                                                     artery

                                Incision                                                         Shunt

                                                           Common carotid
     Cardiovascular

                                                           artery
        Surgery

                                           Figure 6.3-2. Carotid endarterectomy: A. Following occlusion of the superior thyroid
                                           and internal, external, and common carotid arteries, an arteriotomy is performed
                                           opposite the external carotid take off. B. A shunt may be placed to restore internal
                                           carotid flow. C. Plaque is separated from the artery wall. (Reproduced with permission
                                           from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott
                                           Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             See Anesthetic Considerations for Carotid Endarterectomy (Neurosurgical) in Extracranial Procedures, p. 135.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Doig D, Brown M: Carotid stenting versus endarterectomy. Annu Rev Med 2012; 63:259–76.
                                2. Flanigan DP, Flanigan ME, Dorne AL, et al: Long-term results of 442 consecutive, standardized carotid endarterectomy
                                   procedures in standard-risk and high-risk patients. J Vasc Surg 2007; 46:876–82.
                                3. Halliday A, Harrison M, Hayter E, et al: Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) Collaborative Group. 10-year stroke
                                   prevention after successful carotid endarterectomy for asymptomatic stenosis (ACST-1): a multicentre randomized trial.
                                   Lancet 2010; 376:1074–84.
                                4. Hines GL, Feuerman M, Cappello D, et al: Results of carotid endarterectomy with pericardial patch angioplasty: rate and
                                   predictors of restenosis. Ann Vasc Surg 2007; 21:767–71.
                                5. Howell SJ: Carotid endarterectomy. Br J Anaesth 2007; 99:119–31.
                                6. Mantese VA, Timaran CH, Chiu D, Begg RJ, Brott TG, CREST Investigators: Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy
                                   versus stenting Trial (CREST): stenting versus carotid endarterectomy for carotid disease. Stroke 2010; 41:S31–4.
                                7. Moritz S, Kasprzak P, Arlt M, et al: Accuracy of cerebral monitoring in detecting cerebral ischemia during carotid
                                   endarterectomy: a comparison of transcranial Doppler sonography, near-infrared spectroscopy, stump pressure, and
                                   somatosensory evoked potentials. Anesthesiology 2007; 107:563–9.
                                8. NASCET Collaborators: N Engl J Med 1991; 325:445–53.
                                9. Raman G, Moorthy D, Hadar N, et al: Management strategies for asymptomatic carotid stenosis: a systematic review and
                                   meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2013; 158:676–85.
                               10. Rockman C, Loh S: Carotid endarterectomy: still the standard of care for carotid bifurcation disease. Semin Vasc Surg 2011;
                                   24:10–20.
                               11. Stoneham MD, Thompson MP: Arterial pressure management and carotid endarterectomy. Br J Anesth 2009; 102:
                                   442–52.
                               12. Young B, Moore WS, Robertson JT, et al: An analysis of perioperative surgical mortality and morbidity in the Asymptomatic
                                   Carotid Atherosclerosis Study. ACAS Investigators. Stroke 1996; 27:2216–24.

===== PAGE 409 =====
Repair of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms           409

                   REPAIR OF THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSMS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Repairs of aneurysms of the ascending, transverse arch, and descending thoracic aorta are performed to re-
                   pair expanding or leaking aneurysms, or prophylactically to prevent rupture. Patients with Sx of rapid expansion or aneu-
                   rysm leaking may require urgent repair. Each surgical type—ascending, arch, and descending—is considered separately,
                   as follows. Aneurysms of the ascending aorta may arise 2° the degenerative changes of atherosclerosis (exacerbated by
                   old age, HTN, tobacco use); from inborn errors of metabolism (Marfan syndrome); or from poststenotic dilatation and
                   continued expansion of a chronic dissection. Diseases of the entire ascending aorta, including the sinuses of Valsalva, as in
                   Marfan syndrome and annuloaortic ectasia, require replacement of the ascending aorta and aortic root with a composite
                   valved conduit or a valve-sparing aortic root replacement (VSARR), whereas acquired diseases limited to the ascending
                   aorta usually allow replacement of the aorta distal to the sinotubular ridge. Repair of the ascending aorta is usually accom-
                   plished on full CPB with an aortic cross-clamp placed just proximal to the innominate artery and arterial inflow through
                   the femoral artery. The aneurysmal ascending aorta is replaced with a Dacron tube graft from the sinotubular ridge to
                   the innominate artery. Dilatation of the sinuses of Valsalva mandates replacement with a composite valved conduit sewn
                   proximally to the aortic annulus and distally to a normal caliber ascending aorta, with coronary ostia reimplanted in the
                   side of the tube graft, although in some cases with a normal-appearing aortic valve VSARR may be performed.

                                                                                                                                                            Cardiovascular
                   Aneurysms of the aortic arch are the least common of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Because of the need for concomi-

                                                                                                                                                               Surgery
                   tant replacement of the arch vessels, however, they are the most complex to repair. Total CPB is utilized, and cerebral
                   protection is accomplished either by CPB perfusion of one or all cerebral vessels, by retrograde cerebral perfusion
                   (RCP), or by profound hypothermic circulatory arrest at 15–18°C. Repair can originate from the aortic annulus and
                   extend distally to the mid-descending thoracic aorta at the level of the carina. Routine caval cannulation is accom-
                   plished via a median sternotomy, and arterial access is gained via the femoral artery or axillary artery. If circulatory
                   arrest is to be used, the patient is cooled to 15–18°C, the heart is arrested, and with no distal cross-clamp, distal anas-
                   tomosis is accomplished, followed by implantation of the cerebral vessels attached to an island of aorta. This procedure
                   is often performed with the use of RCP to remove all air from the cerebral circulation. Perfusion is then reinstituted,
                   the graft clamped proximal to the innominate artery, and the proximal anastomosis performed, while the patient is
                   being rewarmed. Alternatively, if one elects to perfuse the cerebral vessels, the innominate and left carotid arteries
                   can be individually cannulated and perfused via a “Y” connection from the femoral arterial perfusion line. If axillary
                   cannulation is used alone, antegrade cerebral perfusion can be achieved by control of the proximal innominate artery.
                   This is termed “unilateral cerebral perfusion” and requires close monitoring with cerebral oximetry to estimate the
                   adequacy of contralateral (e.g., left sided) perfusion. If a unilateral drop in cerebral oximetry occurs the surgeon may
                   convert to bilateral perfusion by placing a catheter into the left carotid artery from inside the arch. The necessity for
                   profound hypothermic circulatory arrest is thus avoided. After completion of the distal aortic arch, vessel island, and
                   proximal aortic anastomoses, weaning from CPB and subsequent steps proceed in a routine fashion.
                   Repair of aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta is usually performed for symptomatic and leaking aneurysms,
                   enlarging aneurysms, and aneurysms of sufficient size to warrant prophylactic repair. Aneurysm repair is accomplished
                   through a left posterolateral thoracotomy on full or partial CPB. After entry into the left thorax, venous drainage for
                   CPB may be obtained from the left atrium (partial bypass) or the femoral vein (full bypass), and arterial return is via
                   the femoral artery. This is termed “unilateral cerebral perfusion” and requires close monitoring with cerebral oximetry
                   to estimate the adequacy of contralateral (e.g., left-sided) perfusion. If a unilateral drop in cerebral oximetry occurs, the
                   surgeon may convert to bilateral perfusion by placing a catheter into the left carotid artery from inside the arch. If partial
                   bypass without an oxygenator is elected, thus minimizing the amount of heparin necessary, venous access can be gained
                   via the pulmonary veins or left atrium and arterial return via the femoral artery or distal thoracic aorta. After institution
                   of bypass, the aorta is cross-clamped above and below the aneurysm, the aorta is divided, a tube graft is interposed, and
                   clamps are removed. The patient is weaned from bypass, and the operation is terminated in the routine fashion.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Enlarging or symptomatic aortic aneurysm

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Ascending Aorta                Transverse Arch                 Descending Aorta

                     Position                 Supine                         ⇐                               Lateral decubitus with left side up

                     Incision                 Median sternotomy              ⇐                               Left posterolateral thoracotomy with
                                                                                                             access to femoral artery and vein

===== PAGE 410 =====
410    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                      Ascending Aorta              Transverse Arch                Descending Aorta

                               Special                CPB, if used.                Complete hemodynamic           ⇐ + DLT; lower extremity BP
                                 instrumentation                                   monitors; CPB                  monitor

                               Unique                 Routine CPB hemody-          If profound hypothermic        OLV; partial CPB
                                 considerations       namic monitoring             arrest is utilized, neu-
                                                                                   roprotective adjuncts,
                                                                                   including local hypother-
                                                                                   mia, barbiturates, and
                                                                                   steroids, should be used.

                               Antibiotics            Cefazolin 2 g iv             ⇐                              ⇐

                               Surgical time          Aortic cross-clamp:          Aortic cross-clamp:            Aortic cross-clamp: 25–45 min
                                                      40–120 min                   75–120 min
                                                      CPB: 70–150 min              Circulatory arrest:            CPB: 30–60 min
                                                                                   30–45 min
                                                      Total: 2.5–5 h               CPB: 3–4.5 h                   Total: 2.5–4.5 h
                                                                                   Total: 4–6 h
     Cardiovascular

                               Closing                Aggressive management        Aggressive management          Replacement of DLT with single-
        Surgery

                                 considerations       of coagulopathy, if a long   of coagulopathy                lumen tube
                                                      pump run is necessary.

                               EBL                    300–400 mL                   400–700 mL                     200–300 mL

                               Postop care            ICU, intubated 5–20 h, de-   ICU, intubated 6–24 h          ICU, intubated 5–24 h
                                                      pending on preop condition

                               Mortality              5–10%                        10–15%                         ⇐

                               Morbidity              Renal failure: 5–10%         —                              10–15%
                                                      CVA: 4–6%                    2–5%                           2–4%
                                                      Respiratory failure: 3–5%    10%                            10–15%
                                                      MI: 2–5%                     ⇐                              2–4%

                               Pain score             7–10                         7–10                           9–10

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range             23–80 yr (mean = 55 yr)        50–75 yr                          34–79 yr (mean = 65 yr)

                               Male:Female           3:1                            2:1                               2.5:1

                               Incidence             10–30/yr at tertiary center    5–10/yr at tertiary center        10–30/yr at tertiary center

                               Etiology              Degenerative disease           ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                     Atherosclerotic disease        ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                                                    Chronic dissections               ⇐

                               Associated            CHF (50%); angina (30%);       Aortic valve disease (30%);       HTN (65%); CAD (50%);
                                 conditions          HTN (30%); COPD (15%)          COPD (20%); CAD (15%)             COPD (30%); CHF (10%)

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Typically, patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms have atherosclerosis and HTN. A subset of patients will have
                             a connective tissue disorder (e.g., Marfan syndrome). In contrast with thoracic aortic dissections, thoracic aortic
                             aneurysms may be of a more chronic and asymptomatic nature. A ruptured or leaking aneurysm, however, may have
                              a more precipitous presentation.

===== PAGE 411 =====
Repair of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms           411

                    Cardiovascular            Arch and ascending aneurysms (60–70% of aneurysms): commonly associated with
                                              HTN, cystic medial necrosis, connective tissue disorder (e.g., Marfan syndrome), athero-
                                              sclerosis, or syphilis. CHF may occur 2° to dilation of the aortic annulus and aortic incom-
                                              petence (AR). Aneurysmal compression or intrinsic disease of the coronary arteries may
                                              result in myocardial ischemia.
                                              Descending (30%): usually associated with HTN, cystic medial necrosis, Marfan syn-
                                              drome, and atherosclerosis.
                                              Tests: ECG: 3 for LVH, ischemia. ECHO: 3 for valvular disease, size and extent of aneu-
                                              rysm, LV function. Angiography: 3 exact extent of aneurysm (allows planning of proce-
                                              dure and sites for arterial monitoring), coronary artery anatomy, and degree of occlusion.

                    Respiratory               Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy may → hoarseness (ascending/arch aneurysms). Trache-
                                              al deviation ± stridor or dyspnea may be present 2° tracheal or bronchial compression
                                              (3 CT scan). Hemoptysis or a hemorrhagic pleural effusion suggest an aneurysmal leakage
                                              or rupture. The implications include the possibility of compromised oxygenation, risk of
                                              massive hemorrhage on thoracotomy, increased intrathoracic pressure, and consequent
                                              decreased venous return (especially when IPPV is instituted).
                                              Tests: CXR: 3 for widened mediastinum, distortion of trachea and left main bronchus (be-
                                              cause it may affect the placement of DLT); MRI/CT with contrast: 3 anatomic relation of
                                              aneurysm to surrounding structures (e.g., trachea/bronchi); others as indicated from H&P.

                                                                                                                                                            Cardiovascular
                                              Any deficit should be well documented as neurologic sequelae (e.g., paraplegia/parapare-

                                                                                                                                                               Surgery
                    Neurologic
                                              sia) may occur after surgery.

                    Renal                     Renal problems may occur 2° to AR (↓CO) and heart failure, HTN, or involvement of renal
                                              arteries in the aneurysm.
                                              Tests: BUN; Cr; consider Cr clearance; electrolytes

                    Gastrointestinal          Descending aneurysms that involve the celiac or superior mesenteric arteries may → bowel
                                              ischemia.
                                              Tests: Consider ABG: 3 persistent metabolic acidosis (2% bowel ischemia). If indicated by
                                              H&P, consider abdominal CT/x-ray: 3 ileus.

                    Hematological             If time permits, consider autologous blood donation; preexisting coagulopathy increases
                                              risk of the procedure.
                                              Tests: PT; PTT; Hct/Hb

                    Musculoskeletal           3 Marfanoid appearance; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Laboratory                Others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             Pain and anxiety may significantly contribute to HTN and should be treated (e.g., morphine
                                              0.1 mg/kg iv ± midazolam 0.025–0.1 mg/kg iv); but avoid obtundation. Because many of these
                                              patients present emergently, consider full-stomach precautions—H2 antagonists (e.g., raniti-
                                              dine 5 0 mg iv), metoclopramide (10 mg iv), and antacids (e.g., Na citrate 0.3 M 30 mL po).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: The anesthetic management of patients with aortic dissections and aortic aneurysms are
                   similar in many respects. For intraop and postop management of these conditions, see Anesthetic Considerations for
                   Repair of Acute Aortic Dissections and Dissecting Aneurysms, p. 418.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bisschoff MS, Di Luozzo G, Griepp EB, Griepp RB: Spinal cord preservation in thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair. Perspect
                        Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther 2011; 23:214–22.
                     2. Cheung AT, Pochettino A, McGarvey ML, et al: Strategies to manage paraplegia risk after endovascular stent repair of
                        descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg 2005; 80:1280–8.
                     3. Coady MA, Ikonomidis JS, Cheung AT, et al: A surgical management of descending thoracic aortic disease: open and
                        endovascular approaches: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010; 121:2780–804.
                     4. Estrera AL, Sheinbaum R, Miller CC, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid drainage during thoracic aortic repair: safety and current
                        management. Ann Thorac Surg 2009; 88:9–15.

===== PAGE 412 =====
412    c h a p t e r 6.3       Vascular Surgery

                                5. Fann JI: Descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Coron Artery Dis 2002; 13:93–102.
                                6. Fischbein MP, Miller DC: Long-term durability of open thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair. Semin Vasc Surg
                                   2009; 22:74–80.
                                7. Goodwin MR, Blasius KR, Brand J, Silvay G: One-lung ventilation for surgical repair of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Semin
                                   Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2013; 17:146–51.
                                8. Harrer M, Waldenberger FR, Weiss G, et al: Aortic arch surgery using bilateral antegrade selective cerebral perfusion in
                                   combination with near-infrared spectroscopy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2010; 38:561–7.
                                9. Hoel AW: Aneurysmal disease: thoracic aorta. Surg Clin N Am 2013; 93:893–910.
                               10. Hsu C, Kwan G, van Driel M, Rophael J: Distal aortic perfusion during thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair for prevention of
                                   paraplegia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; Issue 3. Art. No. CD008197.
                               11. Kahn RA, Stone ME, Moskowitz DM: Anesthetic consideration for descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair. Semin
                                   Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 11:205–23.
                               12. Kazui T, Yamashita K, Washiyama N, et al: Aortic arch replacement using selective cerebral perfusion. Ann Thorac Surg 2007;
                                   83:S796–8.
                               13. Milewski RK, Pacini D, Moser GW, et al: Retrograde and antegrade cerebral perfusion: results in short elective arch
                                   reconstructive times. Ann Thorac Surg 2010; 89:1448–57.
                               14. Misfield M, Leontyev S, Borger MA, et al: What is the best strategy for brain protection in patients undergoing aortic arch
                                   surgery? A single center experience of 636 patients. Ann Thorac Surg 2012; 93:1502–8.
                               15. Olsson C, Eriksson N, Stahle E, et al: Surgical and long-term mortality in 2634 consecutive patients operated on the proximal
                                   thoracic aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2007; 31:963–9.
                               16. Piazza M, Ricotta JJ: Open surgical repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc Surg 2012; 6:600–5.
                               17. Reilly LM, Chuter TA: Endovascular repair of thoracoabdominal aneurysms: design options, device construct, patient selection
                                   and complications. J Cardiovasc Surg 2009; 50:447–60.
     Cardiovascular

                               18. Stone DH, Brewster DC, Kwolek CJ, et al: Stent-graft versus open-surgical repair of the thoracic aorta: mid-term results. J Vasc
        Surgery

                                   Surg 2006; 44:1188–97.

                             ENDOVASCULAR STENT-GRAFTING OF AORTIC
                             ANEURYSMS
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: The standard treatment for descending thoracic aortic aneurysm is surgical resection of the aneu-
                             rysm and replacement with a segment of prosthetic graft material. Although resection of aneurysms often can be
                             performed without the need for extracorporeal circulation, the procedure has a reported mortality rate of up to 50%
                             in emergency cases and 12–15% in elective cases. Transluminal endovascular stent-grafting offers an alternative
                             treatment that is less invasive, less hazardous, and potentially less expensive than standard operative repair.
                             In the initial workup, all patients have contrast-enhanced spiral CT scans of the thorax and thoracic aortography to
                             assess the dimensions of the aneurysms. The most important features to consider in evaluating an aortic aneurysm
                             for endovascular stent-graft treatment is the presence of an adequate proximal and distal neck. A minimum neck
                             length of at least 1.5 cm is required to allow secure anchoring of most stent grafts. The distance from the origins of
                             the left subclavian artery and celiac axis to the aneurysm should be at least 1.5–3 cm to ensure that the stent graft
                             does not inadvertently block these arteries. In an effort to reduce the incidence of paraplegia and to limit exclusion
                             of intracostal arteries, the overall length of the stent graft is kept to a minimum.
                             Another important anatomic consideration is the size of the proposed conduit vessel (e.g., iliac) to ensure that it is ad-
                             equate for accommodation of the stent-introducer system, which usually requires at least an 8-mm-diameter vessel.
                             Where the pelvic vessels are less than 8 mm, either a retroperitoneal iliac or retroperitoneal aortic approach is utilized.
                             The stent is the metallic framework to which the graft material is applied. Various balloon-expandable or self-expanding
                             stents are available. For application in the thoracic aorta, stents of 30–40 mm in diameter (mean 35 mm) are required.
                             Typically, thoracic aortic aneurysm stent-graft procedures are performed in the cath lab (although some may be per-
                             formed in the OR, depending on equipment availability and local politics), with the patient intubated and under GA.
                             The cath lab is prepared for aortic surgery, with the patient placed on the table in a shallow right decubitus position.
                             The patient’s thorax may be prepped and draped for a left thoracotomy. For an approach via the common femoral
                             artery, the groin area is prepped for a femoral artery cutdown. When the iliac arteries are of insufficient size, the left

===== PAGE 413 =====
Endovascular Stent-Grafting of Aortic Aneurysms           413

                   lower abdomen is prepped for a retroperitoneal approach to either the aorta or the common iliac artery. High-quality
                   fluoroscopic equipment is essential to ensure accurate placement of the device, and a portable C-arm with digital
                   subtraction capability is moved into position and centered over the thorax. When the iliac vessels are of sufficient
                   size, a cutdown is performed on a femoral artery, the artery is punctured, and a guide wire is advanced into the tho-
                   racic aorta. A pigtail catheter is placed, and an aortogram is performed. The patient is then anticoagulated with iv
                   heparin (100 IU/kg). A long, stiff guide wire is placed, and the 24 Fr sheath and dilator assembly is advanced over the
                   wire until the sheath tip is proximal to the proximal aneurysm neck. The dilator and guide wire are withdrawn, and
                   the stent graft is introduced into the sheath from its loading cartridge using the Teflon pusher. The device is pushed
                   through the sheath until the stent graft approaches the tip of the sheath.
                   To reduce the likelihood of inadvertent downstream deployment of the stent graft caused by the force of blood flow
                   during initial delivery, the arterial BP may be lowered to a mean of 50–60 mm Hg using SNP. Holding the pusher
                   firmly in position, the sheath is rapidly withdrawn, and the stent graft expands into position. Rapid deployment helps
                   to minimize distal migration of the stent graft. Immediately following deployment, the SNP is discontinued, allowing
                   the BP to normalize. Repeat aortogram is performed, and any early leakage of contrast into the aneurysm is treated
                   either with balloon angioplasty of the stent graft or further stent graft placement. Occasionally a faint, persistent leak
                   of contrast is caused by leakage through the graft material. This typically ceases when the patient’s coagulation sta-
                   tus returns to normal. Following removal of the delivery sheath, heparin is reversed with protamine sulfate, and the
                   arteriotomy is repaired surgically. For stent placement through the retroperitoneal aorta, the procedure has a more
                   extensive surgical component; however, the technique is similar.

                                                                                                                                                         Cardiovascular
                   The basic concept of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair via an endovascular route is similar to the preced-

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                   ing section on thoracic aneurysm repair, with some notable exceptions. AAAs commonly arise inferior to the renal
                   arteries, and 80–90% of cases involve either one or both iliac arteries. For this reason, stent grafts that can accom-
                   modate this more complicated anatomy are required. The superior aneurysm neck needs to be of sufficient length
                   (1.5–2 cm) inferior to the most inferior renal artery to provide for stable anchoring. Inferiorly the stent graft must
                   accommodate either or both iliac arteries. The procedure is performed in a two-stage fashion. Initially an aorta-to-
                   single-iliac-artery device is placed from the infrarenal aortic neck into one of the iliac vessels. A contralateral femoral
                   artery puncture is then performed, and a catheter and guide wire are used to access an open stump of the stent graft
                   from the contralateral limb. At this stage, a modular section of stent graft is placed from the aortic component into
                   the contralateral limb; in this way, an aorta-to-bi-iliac graft is placed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Aortic aneurysm

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms                                  Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms

                     Position               Supine/slight right decubitus                              Supine

                     Incision               Femoral artery cutdown                                     Bilateral femoral artery cutdowns

                     Special                Catheters, guide wires, sheaths, dilators, and stent       ⇐
                       instrumentation      grafts

                     Unique                 May require adjunctive procedure (e.g., brachial artery    ⇐
                       considerations       catheterization, balloon angioplasty, possible left sub-
                                            clavian-to-common carotid artery bypass procedure); iv
                                            heparin 100–300 IU/kg

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv                                           ⇐

                     Surgical time          1–3 h                                                      ⇐

                     Closing                None                                                       ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Usually minimal; however, can be up to 2–3 U               ⇐

                     Postop care            ICU × 1 d                                                  ⇐

                     Mortality              3–5%                                                       2–3%

===== PAGE 414 =====
414    c h a p t e r 6.3       Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                         Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms                                    Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms

                               Morbidity                 Paraplegia: 2–3%                                              Acute rupture: < 1%
                                                         Infection: 1%                                                 ⇐
                                                         Surgical conversion: < 1%                                     ⇐

                               Pain score                3–4                                                           3–4

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                       30–90 yr                                   40–90 yr

                               Incidence                       1/10,000 of the population in the          1/1,000 of the population in the United States.
                                                               United States.

                               Etiology                        Atherosclerosis; HTN; trauma; aortic       Atherosclerosis; infection
                                                               dissection; infection

                               Associated conditions           CAD; aneurysmal disease elsewhere          ⇐
     Cardiovascular

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        Surgery

                             The anesthetic considerations for thoracic and abdominal stent-grafting are similar because the surgical techniques,
                             complications, patient concurrent disease, and stent-graft deployment techniques are similar. Patients may be
                             asymptomatic; most will have coexisting CAD, PVD, and/or cerebrovascular disease.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Baril D, Kahn R, Ellozy SH, et al: Endovascular abdominal aortic repair: emerging developments and anesthetic considerations.
                                   J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 21:730–42.
                                2. Makkad B, Pilling S: Management of thoracic aneurysm. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005; 9:227–40.
                                3. Riddell JM, Black JH, Brewster DC, et al: Endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2005; 43:
                                   79–91.
                                4. Ruppert V, Leurs LJ, Steckmeier B, et al: Influence of anesthesia type on outcome after endovascular aortic aneurysm repair:
                                   an analysis based on EUROSTAR data. J Vasc Surg 2006; 44:16–21.

                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Preop considerations for these patients are the same as for any patient undergoing repair of a descending thoracic an-
                             eurysm, abdominal aortic aneurysm, or aortobifemoral aneurysm. Many of these patients, however, are not suitable
                             for conventional repair via a thoracotomy because of respiratory disease (e.g., FEV1 < 1 L, severe COPD, PaCO2 > 60
                             mm Hg), CAD, renal failure, CHF, or a combination of these factors. As such, they generally are at very high risk for
                             periop morbidity and mortality. Before surgery the anesthesiologist should consult with the surgical and radiological
                             teams to decide what will be done should a complication such as penetration or rupture of the aneurysm occur dur-
                             ing surgery (typically, an emergency thoracotomy or laparotomy performed in the cath lab).

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: Usually GETA (OLV may be required for emergency thoracotomy 2° ruptured thoracic
                             aneurysm). Abdominal stent grafts may be placed under epidural or spinal anesthesia. Rarely, stent-grafting may be
                             carried out with local anesthesia or MAC in patients unable to tolerate GA or epidural. In that case, the patient will
                             come to the OR for removal of the introducer system and repair of the femoral artery.

                              Induction                   Because these patients are typically extubated, the dose of fentanyl (5–10 mcg/kg) is lim-
                                                          ited to that which will suppress the hypertensive response to intubation, while still allowing
                                                          for early extubation. The same considerations apply to the use of muscle relaxants (e.g.,
                                                          vecuronium [0.1 mg/kg] or rocuronium [1–1.5 mg/kg]). A DLT or a Univent ETT should
                                                          be used, unless the team decides that a thoracotomy will not be performed under any
                                                          circumstance.

===== PAGE 415 =====
Endovascular Stent-Grafting of Aortic Aneurysms            415

                    Maintenance       Usually a balanced anesthetic technique of O2/air/isoflune or sevoflurane, supplemented
                                      with fentanyl (or remifentanil infusion) as needed. Hemodynamic control of BP (esmolol,
                                      SNP, NTG) and heart rate to avoid myocardial ischemia is important.
                                      Anesthetic management during stent-graft deployment: During stent-graft deploy-
                                      ment, the aorta is momentarily occluded. Formerly, this resulted in a rapid ↑ BP → stent
                                      graft being moved from its intended position. The newer generations of stent grafts,
                                      using thermal or mechanical means for rapid deployment, cause minimal hemodynamic
                                      change, eliminating the need for aggressive BP control.

                    Emergence         Extubation is desirable, although hypothermia (< 34°C) may prevent this. Otherwise, aim
                                      for early extubation in the ICU. DLT (if used) may be replaced with a standard ETT at end
                                      of procedure if the patient is not extubated in the cath lab. Recovery is usually in the ICU.

                    Blood and fluid   IV: 14–16 ga × 1                   Although usually       minimal,    blood    loss   can   be
                       requirements   NS/LR @ 4–8 mL/kg/h                considerable.
                                      PRBC available

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (p. B-1)         Arterial line placement should be on the right as the ra-
                                      Arterial line                      diologists may require access to the left brachial artery.
                                                                         CVP monitoring is usually sufficient. Central access for
                                      CVP catheter                       vasoactive drugs may be needed.

                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                                      Urinary catheter                   TEE is used to aid in the identification of the thoracic an-

                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                      TEE                                eurysm necks, to monitor deployment of the stent graft
                                                                         and to identify any continued flow of blood into the an-
                                                                         eurysmal sac after deployment (endoleak).
                                                                         CSF drainage → ↓ CSF pressure may be necessary to
                                                                         minimize spinal cord ischemia (anterior spinal artery
                                      CSF pressure/drainage              syndrome).

                    Positioning       3 and pad pressure points          Supine ± slight right lateral decubitus
                                      3 eyes

                    Complications     Hemorrhage                         Hemorrhage at the groin site can be considerable and
                                                                         may be concealed.
                                      Vessel damage                      Damage to the vessels (femoral, iliac, or abdominal
                                                                         aorta) during passage of the insertion system can occur
                                                                         with attendant massive hemorrhage.
                                      Rupture of aorta                   Rupture or penetration of the thoracic aneurysm also can
                                                                         occur, necessitating rapid conversion to open thoracotomy.
                                      Deployment failure/incorrect       The stent graft may deploy in an incorrect position or
                                      position                           fail to fully deploy. This may require positioning of fur-
                                                                         ther stent grafts, balloon expansion of the stent graft, or
                                                                         conversion to thoracotomy.
                                      Hypothermia                        Hypothermia can be a problem as a circulating-water
                                                                         warming blanket cannot be used on the operating table
                                                                         (use of fluoroscopy). Much of the patient’s body is ex-
                                                                         posed (upper-body Bair-Hugger usually okay), and a
                                                                         lower-body warming blanket cannot be used as the lower
                                                                         limbs may be ischemic during insertion of the stent graft.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications     Aortic perforation/rupture             Requires emergency surgery.
                                      Migration of grafts                    → loss of distal pulses, mesenteric ischemia, acute
                                                                             renal insufficiency.
                                      Femoral artery dehiscence              Requires prompt return to OR.
                                      Distal embolization                    3 pulses; angiography/surgical intervention.
                                      Paraplegia                             3 reflexes; prompt return to OR.

===== PAGE 416 =====
416    c h a p t e r 6.3       Vascular Surgery

                              Pain                        Minimal analgesic requirements             If groin incision, local anesthetic infiltration may be
                                management                                                           used.

                              Tests                       As indicated by patient condition.         CT scan, angiogram prior to discharge and at regu-
                                                                                                     lar intervals following discharge.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Coady MA, Ikonomidis JS, Cheung AT, et al: A surgical management of descending thoracic aortic disease: open and
                                   endovascular approaches: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010; 121:2780–804.
                                2. Crimi E, Lee JT, Dake MD, van der Starre PJ: Transesophageal echocardiography guidance for stent-graft repair of a thoracic
                                   aneurysm is facilitated by the ability of partial stent deployment. Ann Vasc Surg 2012; 26(6):861.e7–9.
                                3. Dake MD, Miller DC, Semba CP, et al: Transluminal placement of endovascular stent-grafts for the treatment of descending
                                   thoracic aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med 1994: 331(26):1729–34.
                                4. Findeiss LK, Cody ME: Endovascular repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Semin Intervent Radiol 2011; 28(11):107–17.
                                5. Fleck T, Hutschala D, Weissl M, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid drainage as a useful treatment option to relieve paraplegia after
                                   stent-graft implantation for acute aortic dissection type B. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2002; 123:1003–5.
                                6. Foley OJ, Criado FJ, Farber MA, et al: VALOR Investegators: Long-term results with the Talent thoracic stent graft in the
                                   VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg 2012; 56:1214–21.
                                7. Herold U, Piotrowski J, Baumgart D, et al: Endoluminal stent graft repair for acute and chronic type B aortic dissection and
                                   atherosclerotic aneurysm of the thoracic aorta: an interdisciplinary task. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2002; 22:891–7.
                                8. Miller DC: Through the looking glass: the first 20 years of thoracic aortic stent-grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013;
     Cardiovascular

                                   145:S142–8.
        Surgery

                                9. Mitchell RS, Dake MD, Semba CP, et al: Endovascular stent-graft repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc
                                   Surg 1996; 111(5):1054–62.
                               10. Schutz W, Gauss A, Meierhenrich R, et al: Transesophageal echocardiographic guidance of thoracic aortic stent-graft
                                   implantation. J Endovasc Ther 2002; 9:14–9.

                             REPAIR OF ACUTE AORTIC DISSECTIONS
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Repair of acute aortic dissection is performed to prevent life-threatening complications such as
                             hemorrhage, tamponade, and heart failure 2° acute aortic valvular insufficiency and to redirect flow into the true
                             lumen. Emergent repair of acute ascending dissections is generally accepted therapy to prevent rupture of the aortic
                             root with exsanguination or pericardial tamponade. Mortality for acute ascending dissection is estimated at 1% per
                             hour for the first 48 hours. The management of descending thoracic aortic dissections remains controversial, but
                             surgical intervention probably should be recommended only for younger patients, patients with uncontrolled pain or
                             evidence for continued expansion or extravasation, and those with branch-vessel compromise.
                             Ascending aortic dissections typically produce sharp, tearing retrosternal pain that penetrates straight through
                             to the subscapular area. The presentation, however, is so frequently variable that any patient in extremis, especially
                             with migratory pain or vacillating findings, and even asymptomatic patients with valvular aortic regurgitation (AR),
                             should be considered for the diagnosis. With a suggestive Hx, a new murmur, or a pulse deficit, an enlarged mediasti-
                             nal shadow on chest radiography should prompt further diagnostic efforts. CT scanning, MRI, and aortography may
                             all be diagnostic, but no diagnostic modality has 100% sensitivity. TEE appears to be highly sensitive in detecting a
                             mobile intimal flap in the ascending or descending aorta. In addition, TEE can provide useful information regarding
                             AR, periaortic hematoma, and flow within a false channel. It is usually available at the bedside or in the emergency
                             ward and does not subject the patient to a contrast load.
                             After the patients are diagnosed, they are transported immediately to the OR. Through a median sternotomy, venous
                             access is gained via the right atrium, and arterial inflow is supplied through a femoral artery or axillary artery. CPB is es-
                             tablished, the patient cooled to 18°C, and circulatory support discontinued although antegrade or retrograde cerebral per-
                             fusion may be employed. During a period of circulatory arrest, antegrade or retrograde cerebral perfusion, the ascending
                             aorta is opened and the tear localized. The repair is carried distally into the arch, if the entire dissection can be resected,
                             and the distal aortic layers are reapproximated with a Teflon felt strip supporting the medial and adventitial layers. The
                             distal graft anastomosis is then completed, the graft clamped, the bypass pump restarted, and systemic warming com-
                             menced. Proximally, the aortic root is reconstructed, again using Teflon felt to support the medial and adventitial layers
                             and to resuspend the aortic valve, which can be salvaged in approximately 85% of cases. The heart is then cleared of air and

===== PAGE 417 =====
Repair of Acute Aortic Dissections      417

                                                                                                                                                       Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                                Figure 6.3-3. The three classification systems of aortic dissection and the distribution
                                of the intimal tear.

                   the cross-clamp removed to allow reperfusion of the coronary circulation. After a sufficient period of resuscitation, the
                   patient is weaned from CPB. Aggressive management of an acquired coagulopathy is not unusual prior to chest closure.
                   Repair of dissections involving the descending thoracic aorta is accomplished through a left thoracotomy utilizing
                   partial CPB. Venous drainage is usually via the femoral vein, although the pulmonary vein may be used for partial
                   or “left-heart” CPB. Arterial access is via the femoral artery. After institution of CPB, the dissected aorta above and
                   below the most damaged area is cross-clamped and the aorta transected. After oversewing patent intercostal arteries,
                   the medial and adventitial layers are buttressed with Teflon felt, and an interposition Dacron graft is sewn into place.
                   After evacuation of air, clamps are removed, and the patient weaned from CPB. Heparin reversal, decannulation, and
                   closure are accomplished in the usual manner.

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acute dissection of the aorta (See Fig. 6.3-3 for types of dissection.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Ascending Aorta                                          Descending Aorta

                     Position                Supine                                                   Lateral decubitus, left side up

                     Incision                Median sternotomy                                        Left lateral thoracotomy

                     Unique                  Full hemodynamic monitoring, with provisions for         DLT; CPB; TEE; lumbar drain
                       considerations        circulatory arrest, profound hypothermia, barbiturates
                                             and steroids; TEE

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv                                         ⇐

                     Surgical time           Cross-clamp: 30–50 min                                   30–60 min
                                             Circulatory arrest: 20–30 min                            —
                                             CPB: 60–100 min                                          35–60 min
                                             Total: 3–5 h                                             ⇐

                     Closing                 Aggressively treat coagulopathy (frequently 2° ↓ Plt).   Replace DLT with single-lumen ETT.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     400–800 mL                                               600–800 mL

                     Postop care             ICU: 1–2 d, intubated                                    ⇐

===== PAGE 418 =====
418    c h a p t e r 6.3    Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                                       Ascending Aorta                                       Descending Aorta

                               Mortality               10–25%                                                ⇐

                               Morbidity               Bleeding: 3–8%                                        Paraplegia: 5%
                                                       Respiratory insufficiency: 2–5%                       CVA: 1–2%
                                                       CVA: 2–4%                                             MI: 1–2%

                               Pain score              7–10                                                  9–10

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                40–70 yr

                               Male:Female              3:2

                               Incidence                10/100,000

                               Etiology                 Degenerative aortic disease

                               Associated conditions    HTN; secondary AR; bicuspid aortic valve; Marfan syndrome
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Sx are usually of sudden onset and depend on the site of dissection and specific organ involvement. Aortic dissections
                             are divided into 2 types, depending on the site of intimal tear: Type A—ascending and aortic arch, and Type B—
                             descending aorta (Fig 6.3-3). Initial treatment involves the use of antihypertensive medications (e.g., SNP) to control
                             BP and β-blockers (e.g., esmolol) to ↓ contractility. Type A dissections usually require urgent surgery. Patients pre-
                             senting electively for thoracotomy (descending aorta) may have a thoracic epidural catheter placed the night before
                             surgery. These patients are only heparinized during the procedure.

                              Respiratory              3 for recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy with chronic aneurysmal dilation. Tracheal and left
                                                       main bronchus compression → difficult intubation, atelectasis; hemoptysis 2° rupture into
                                                       lung; hemothorax → compromised oxygenation, ↑ intrathoracic pressure → ↓ venous re-
                                                       turn, especially with IPPV.
                                                       Tests: CXR: 3 for widened mediastinum, tracheal or left main bronchus compression and
                                                       distortion (affects DLT placement), atelectasis, pleural effusion (or hemothorax 2° rupture).

                              Cardiovascular           Aortic dissections may be associated with chronic HTN, cystic medial necrosis, or other
                                                       connective tissue disorder (e.g., Marfan syndrome) and trauma. Dissection may result in
                                                       cardiac tamponade, acute aortic valve incompetence, acute cardiac failure, angina, MI, or
                                                       rupture of the aorta. Dissection of major arteries may result in ↓ or absent peripheral pulses,
                                                       which may affect the placement sites for intraarterial monitoring and central venous access.
                                                       Pain and anxiety may result in HTN, while rupture or leakage may result in ↓ BP and shock.
                                                       Tests: ECG: 3 for Sx of LVH, ischemia or infarction, low voltage (tamponade). ECHO: 3 for
                                                       site of dissection, valvular competence, LV function, pericardial effusion, or tamponade. Angi-
                                                       ography: 3 for site of dissection (Type A or B), valvular function, involvement of coronary and
                                                       other major arteries, sites of rupture, LV function. CT scan: 3 site and extent of dissection.

                              Neurological             Deficits are not uncommon, especially with Type B dissections where the blood supply to
                                                       the spinal cord may be jeopardized. Document preop exam carefully.

                              Renal                    Renal failure 2° renal artery involvement in dissection, shock, or cardiac failure. UO should
                                                       be monitored closely during initial medical therapy.
                                                       Tests: UO; BUN; Cr; electrolytes

===== PAGE 419 =====
Repair of Acute Aortic Dissections         419

                    Gastrointestinal        Compromised blood supply to the bowel or liver may result in ischemia → metabolic aci-
                                            dosis and ↓ liver function.
                                            Tests: Consider ABG: 3 persistent metabolic acidosis; LFTs, if indicated by H&P.

                    Hematologic             Coagulopathy may be present 2° massive hemorrhage or liver involvement and can in-
                                            crease risk of the surgery.
                                            Tests: PT; PTT; Hct/Hb

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Because many of these patients present emergently, consider full-stomach precautions:
                                            H2-antagonists (ranitidine 50 mg iv), metoclopramide (10–20 mg iv), antacids (Na citrate
                                             0.3 M 30 mL po). Alleviate anxiety and pain (midazolam 0.025–0.05 mg/kg iv), which may
                                             worsen HTN, but avoid obtundation.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± thoracic epidural. Preinduction control of BP and contractility (NTG or SNP to
                   SBP = 105–115 and esmolol to HR = 60–80) is important in preventing extension of the dissection or rupture of the

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                   aneurysm. Fluid resuscitation may be necessary prior to induction.

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                    Induction               Control of hypertensive response to laryngoscopy and intubation is important and may be ac-
                                            complished with moderate-dose narcotic (fentanyl 10–15 mcg/kg or sufentanil 1–2 mcg/kg)
                                            and etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg), esmolol (5–10 mg iv bolus), or SNP (25–50 mcg bolus). Pre-
                                            treatment with lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) also may be required to further control the hypertensive
                                            response to laryngoscopy. Muscle relaxation may be obtained using vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg)
                                            or rocuronium (1–2 mg/kg). Remember the possibility of a full stomach in this patient popula-
                                            tion. Hence, a modified rapid-sequence induction (cricoid pressure with manual ventilation
                                            and NMR) may achieve the two goals of relatively rapid induction and intubation and tight
                                            control of BP. Usually a left DLT is used in patients with descending lesions to improve surgical
                                            access; however, it may be difficult to place due to aneurysmal compression of the trachea and
                                            left mainstem bronchus, and it is associated with a small risk of aneurysmal rupture. For these
                                            reasons, a right DLT may be preferred. FOB is mandatory to verify ET placement.

                    Maintenance             O2/narcotic/benzodiazepine: low-dose volatile agent (isoflurane [0.3–0.5%] or sevoflurane
                                            [0.5–1%]) may be used to control BP (MAP = 60–80), although infusion of vasopressors,
                                            vasodilators, or inotropes may be necessary. Control HR (< 80; anesthesia, esmolol) and
                                            contractility (β-blockade or inotropes, depending on circumstances). Benzodiazepines
                                            may be used for amnesia (midazolam 100 mcg/kg). If thoracic epidural in place, fentanyl
                                            (20–30 mcg/kg) or sufentanil (4–6 mcg/kg) may be used. Most Type A aneurysms and
                                            ascending/arch aneurysms require hypothermic CPB (see Anesthetic Considerations for
                                            Cardiopulmonary Bypass, p. 350). Intraop anesthetic considerations are governed primar-
                                            ily by the site of the aortic pathology. These considerations are discussed below.

                    Emergence               Transported to ICU, sedated, intubated, and ventilated × 24–48 h. Following repairs of
                                            the descending aorta (thoracotomy incision), weaning from ventilator may be aided by
                                            epidural narcotics after documentation of normal spinal cord function and coagulation.

                    Blood and fluid         Anticipate large blood loss.             In Type A dissections and arch aneurysms, if
                       requirements         IV: 14 ga – 7 Fr × 2                     possible, avoid iv placement in the left arm or left
                                            NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/kg/h                       IJ/subclavian veins because of the possibility of
                                            Warm all fluids.                          innominate vein ligation. Mannitol (0.25–0.5 g/
                                            Humidify gases.                           kg iv) should be given if renal perfusion is com-
                                            Cross-match 6–8 U of blood.               promised by dissection or before cross-clamping.
                                            UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h                          Consider normovolemic hemodilution if the pa-
                                                                                      tient is stable and the Hct > 35. After unclamping:
                                                                                      furosemide (1 mg/kg), if hemodynamically stable.

===== PAGE 420 =====
420    c h a p t e r 6.3   Vascular Surgery

                              Monitoring             Standard monitors (p. B-1).       Arterial line site is dependent on type of surgery
                                                     Arterial line                     and location of the lesion. Because the right subcla-
                                                     CVP, PA catheter (optional)       vian artery may be compromised in patients with
                                                     Urinary catheter                  ascending lesions, the left radial or femoral arter-
                                                                                       ies may need to be used. Aortic arch lesions may
                                                                                       involve the vascular supply to both upper extremi-
                                                                                       ties; hence, femoral artery catheterization may be
                                                                                       necessary. In ascending lesions, two artery lines
                                                                                       may be required—right radial (above clamp pres-
                                                                                       sure) and left femoral (below clamp pressure). Con-
                                                                                       sult with surgeon as to best site.
                                                     TEE                               TEE is useful to assess cardiac function, regional wall
                                                                                       motion abnormalities, valvular pathology, aortic valvu-
                                                                                       lar repair (if required as part of a Type A repair). Probe
                                                                                       passage may increase compression of the trachea, im-
                                                                                       peding ventilation. Caution should be used in the pres-
                                                                                       ence of aneurysmal compression of the esophagus.
                                                     Temperature                       Monitor both core (esophageal/bladder) and tym-
                                                                                       panic membrane T (as indicative of brain T)—im-
                                                                                       portant in deep hypothermic arrest.
     Cardiovascular

                                                     EEG/EP (arch/ascending lesions)   EEG/EP may help in assessing effectiveness of cere-
        Surgery

                                                                                       bral protection or adequacy of cerebral perfusion.
                                                     SSEPs/MEPs (descending            SSEPs may detect posterior spinal perfusion prob-
                                                     lesions)                          lems, while MEPs may detect anterior cord dys-
                                                                                       function. Both EEG and EPs may require expert
                                                                                       help to set up, monitor, and interpret.
                                                     Cerebral oximetry                 Cerebral oximetry may be helpful in detecting
                                                                                       changes in cerebral blood flow after cannulation of
                                                                                       the innominate artery.

                              Complications          Hemorrhage                        Both are common. Hemorrhage should be treated with
                                                     Coagulopathy                      crystalloid, colloid, or blood products, as indicated.

                              Ascending lesions      CPB                               Usual site of cannulation for CPB is the a scending
                                                     AR                                aorta, axillary, or femoral arteries. Aortic valve
                                                     Coronary arteries                 replacement may be necessary. Patients may have
                                                                                       myocardial ischemia 2° coronary artery occlusion;
                                                                                       may require CABG or reimplantation of vessels.
                                                     Deep hypothermic arrest           Cerebral protective measures and selective perfu-
                                                                                       sion of cerebral vessels may be required. (See below.)

                              Arch lesions           CPB                               Usual site of cannulation for CPB is femoral or axil-
                                                     Deep hypothermic arrest           lary artery. Cerebral protection relies on hypother-
                                                                                       mia (20–22°C) and drugs (hydrocortisone 100 mg iv
                                                                                       or dexamethasone 8 mg iv) to reduce CMRO2 and
                                                                                       neuronal injury. The head is surface cooled (protect
                                                                                       eyes and ears from cold injury). EEG may be moni-
                                                                                       tored to ensure absence of brain electrical activity.
                                                                                       Monitor tympanic membrane T as an indication of
                                                                                       brain T. Avoid hyperglycemia and maintain normal
                                                                                       pH and PaCO2 when measured at 37°C (alpha stat).
                                                                                       Maintain muscle relaxation.

                              Descending             Precross-clamping                 Mannitol (0.5 g/kg) and furosemide (20–40 mg iv)
                                lesions                                                should be given before clamp application to provide
                                                                                       renal protection, even if a shunt is placed. Hypo-
                                                                                       thermia (32–34°C) may protect spinal cord.
                                                     Shunt                             A heparin-bonded shunt may be used from the aortic
                                                                                       arch to the femoral artery to provide distal perfusion.

===== PAGE 421 =====
Repair of Acute Aortic Dissections        421

                    Descending        Partial bypass                         Partial CPB may be used to provide distal perfusion.
                      lesions                                                In this arrangement, the heart perfuses the head
                      (cont’d)                                               and upper extremities, while CPB is used to perfuse
                                                                             and oxygenate the lower body. Venous drainage is
                                                                             from the femoral vein, PA, or left atrium and re-
                                                                             turned via the femoral artery. Distal and proximal
                                                                             pressures are altered by controlling cardiac filling,
                                                                             pump flow, and vasodilators.
                                      Cross-clamping                         Application of clamp may → acute HTN with isch-
                                                                             emia and LV failure. This may be controlled by par-
                                                                             tial bypass, shunting or use of vasodilators (SNP
                                                                             0.5–2 mcg/kg/min, NTG 0.5–2 mcg/kg/min). During
                                                                             cross-clamping, monitor UO and ✓ metabolic acido-
                                                                             sis (renal or bowel ischemia) with serial ABGs. Cross-
                                                                             clamp time should be < 30 min to reduce incidence of
                                                                             paraplegia. The surgeons often request that a lumbar
                                                                             CSF drain be inserted to ↓ CSF pressure (to ≤ CVP)
                                                                             and, thus, improve spinal cord blood flow.
                                      Unclamping                             Unclamping may result in severe ↓ BP and myo-
                                                                             cardial depression. Hypovolemia, acidosis, vaso-

                                                                                                                                              Cardiovascular
                                                                             active factors, and reactive hyperemia have been

                                                                                                                                                 Surgery
                                                                             implicated as the cause. Prior to unclamping, en-
                                                                             sure adequate volume status (CVP and/or PCWP
                                                                             2–5 mm Hg above patient’s normal); treat acidosis;
                                                                             have vasopressors available; and the clamp should
                                                                             be released slowly over 1–2 min. Use of partial by-
                                                                             pass or a shunt to ensure distal perfusion will miti-
                                                                             gate unclamping shock. When hemodynamically
                                                                             stable, give furosemide (1 mg/kg iv). Inotropes
                                                                             (dopamine) may be needed to support circulation.

                       Positioning    ✓ eyes
                                      ✓ and pad pressure points
                                      Arch and ascending: supine, shoulder roll
                                      Descending: lateral decubitus, axillary roll, pillow between knees

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications     Myocardial ischemia, CHF               A DLT may be required in lesions of the descend-
                                      Dysrhythmias                           ing aorta, if hemorrhage continues from left lung;
                                      Hemorrhage                             otherwise, the tube may be replaced at the end of
                                      Coagulopathy                           procedure by a single-lumen ETT. BP should be
                                      Renal failure                          controlled to MAP 60–80 and HR < 100 to decrease
                                      Bowel ischemia                         the likelihood of repeat dissection, bleeding, or
                                      Respiratory failure                    graft dehiscence.
                                      Paraplegia                             Anterior spinal artery syndrome

                    Pain              PCA (p. E-4)                           Thoracic epidural catheter may be used in patients
                      management      Epidural (p. E-6)                      following thoracotomy if coagulation status normal.

                    Tests             ECG: ischemia, infarction, dysrhythmias
                                      CXR: line and ETT placement; pulmonary contusion
                                      Coagulation profile
                                      Renal: BUN, Cr
                                      ABG: Respiratory, gut ischemia
                                      CT scan: CNS or spinal neurologic deficits
                                      Electrolytes

===== PAGE 422 =====
422    c h a p t e r 6.3        Vascular Surgery

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Atkins MD Jr, Black JH III, Cambria RP: Aortic dissection: perspective in the era of stent-graft repair. J Vasc Surg 2006;
                                   (Suppl A):30A–43A.
                                2. Dong CCJ, MacDonald DB, Janusz MT: Intraoperative spinal cord monitoring during descending thoracic and
                                   thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74:S1873–6.
                                3. Dorotta I, Kimball-Jones P, Applegate R: Deep hypothermia and circulatory arrest in adults. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
                                   2007; 11:66–76.
                                4. Estrera AL, Miller CC, Goodrick J, et al: Update on outcomes of acute type B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg 2007;
                                   83:S842–5.
                                5. Fann JI, Smith JA, Miller DC, et al: Surgical management of aortic dissection over a 30-year period. Circulation 1995;
                                   92(II):113–21.
                                6. Fattori R, Mineo G, Di Eusano M: Acute type B aortic dissection: current management strategies. Curr Opin Cardiol 2011;
                                   26:488–93.
                                7. Hughes GC, Andersen ND, McCann RL: Management of acute type B aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; 145:S202–7.
                                8. Knipp BS, Deeb GM, Prager RL, et al: A contemporary analysis of outcomes for operative repair of type A aortic dissection in
                                   the United States. Surgery 2007; 142:524–8.
                                9. Kohl BA, McGarvey ML: Anesthesia and neurocerebral monitoring for aortic dissection. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2005;
                                   17:236–46.
                               10. Kruger T, Conzelmann LO, Bonser RS, et al: Acute aortic dissection type A. Br J Surg 2012; 99:1331–1344.
                               11. Kruger T, Weigang E, Hoffmann I, Blettner M, Aebert H: GERAADA Investegators: cerebral protection during surgery for
                                   acute aortic dissection type A: results of the German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection Type A (GERAADA). Circulation
                                   2011; 124:434–43.
                               12. Lips J, de Haan P, de Jager S, et al: The role of transcranial motor evoked potentials in predicting neurologic and histopathologic
     Cardiovascular

                                   outcome after experimental spinal cord ischemia. Anesthesiology 2002; 97:183–91.
        Surgery

                               13. Lu S, Sun X, Hong T, et al: Bilateral versus unilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion in arch reconstruction for aortic dissection.
                                   Ann Thorac Surg 2012; 93:1917–20.
                               14. Olsson C, Thelin S, Stahle E, et al: Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection: increasing prevalence and improved outcomes
                                   reported in a nationwide population-based study of more than 14,000 cases from 1987 to 2002. Circulation 2006; 114:2611–8.
                               15. Penco M, Paparoni S, Dagianti A: Usefulness of transesophageal echocardiography in the assessment of aortic dissection. Am
                                   J Cardiol 2000; 86:53G–56G.
                               16. Szeto WY, Gleason TG: Operative management of ascending aortic dissections. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2005; 17: 247–55.

                             REPAIR OF ANEURYSMS OF THE
                             THORACOABDOMINAL AORTA
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Aneurysms of the thoracoabdominal aorta (TAAA) may occur because of degenerative aortic disease
                             (atherosclerosis), as a consequence of hereditary disorders of metabolism (Marfan syndrome), or as a sequela of
                             chronic aortic dissections. These aneurysms are classified into four types (Fig 6.3-4) that occur with equal frequency:
                             Type I consists of aneurysms that involve most of the descending thoracic and upper abdominal aorta. Type II
                             involves most of the descending thoracic aorta and most or all of the abdominal aorta. Type III involves the distal
                             thoracic and varying segments of the abdominal aorta. Type IV involves most or all of the abdominal aorta, including
                             the origins of the visceral vessels.
                             Repair of these aneurysms is an extensive, difficult, and demanding procedure, as blood flow to the entire body below
                             the neck is interrupted, with resultant renal and visceral ischemia. In addition, the blood supply to the spinal cord
                             may arise from lumbar and/or intercostal vessels in the affected aortic segment, producing critical cord ischemia
                             during cross-clamping and postop paraplegia.
                             Almost all thoracoabdominal aneurysm repairs are performed through a thoracoabdominal incision (Fig. 6.3-5)
                             using the inclusion technique (Fig. 6.3-6) as advocated by Crawford et al. After opening the chest, the incision is
                             extended across the costal cartilage onto the abdomen. The diaphragm is radially incised to the aortic hiatus, and
                             the retroperitoneal dissection plane established anterior to the psoas musculature. All intraabdominal contents, as
                             well as the left kidney, are reflected anteriorly (Fig. 6.3-6). Only proximal aortic control is established. After mini-
                             mal heparinization, OLV is established to allow collapse of the left lung, the proximal aorta at the aneurysm neck
                             is cross-clamped, and the aneurysm is incised. Back-bleeding from patent intercostal, mesenteric, and renal vessels
                             can be controlled by balloon catheters, and aggressive blood salvage with autotransfusion devices is mandatory. The
                             repair entails suturing a tube graft proximally to the divided aorta and then sewing islands of aortic tissue containing

===== PAGE 423 =====
Repair of Aneurysms of the Thoracoabdominal Aorta              423

                                      Type I                  Type II                  Type III                     Type IV

                               Figure 6.3-4. Crawford’s classification of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms

                                                                                                                                                         Cardiovascular
                               (TAAA). (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery,

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                               Vol 2. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   intercostal visceral vessels onto appropriate-sized holes in the side of the tube graft. This allows reperfusion of im-
                   portant intercostal, celiac axis, superior mesenteric, renal arteries, and finally, the distal aorta or iliac arteries. Be-
                   cause there is obligate visceral ischemia during the period of cross-clamping (which must be limited to < 60–75 min),
                   the operation must proceed expeditiously.

                                                         A

                                                         B

                               Figure 6.3-5. Lateral A: and frontal B: views of the thoracoabdominal incisions used
                               for repair of type IV (W, X), type III (Y, Z), and types I and II (Z) TAAAs. (Reproduced
                               with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, Vol 2. Lippincott
                               Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 424 =====
424    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                                                                         Peritoneum

                                                                                                                 Diaphragm

                                                                                                                             Renal
                                                                                                                             fascia
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                          Figure 6.3-6. During the inclusion technique, the anterior renal fascia is opened
                                          and the kidney is mobilized, along with the upper abdominal organs (on the left).
                                          (Reproduced with permission from Wind GG, Valentine RJ: Anatomic Exposures in
                                          Vascular Surgery. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore: 1991.)

                             Alternatively, in an effort to afford both spinal cord and visceral protection through hypothermia, the operation may
                             be performed on CPB during a period of profound hypothermic circulatory arrest, which may exacerbate hemor-
                             rhagic complications.
                             After aortic cross-clamping, the aneurysm is opened and the repair performed from within the aneurysm, sewing
                             on-lay patches of the intercostal, mesenteric, and renal vessels to openings created in the tube graft. This no-clamp
                             technique allows reasonable management of these very extensive aneurysms, but results in an obligatory and ongo-
                             ing blood loss through back-bleeding of visceral vessels until the anastomoses are complete.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Expanding, painful, or large thoracoabdominal aneurysm

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position               Right lateral decubitus; hips rotated posteriorly to 45° and left arm draped forward over an
                                                      airplane sling. Axillary roll placed. (See Fig. 6.3-5A.)

                               Incision               Posterolateral thoracotomy incision, in appropriate interspace, extended across the costal mar-
                                                      gin to midline, then extended inferiorly as a midline abdominal incision (Fig. 6.3-5). The incision
                                                      is one of the largest incisions in surgery, necessitated by the absolute need for exposure in this
                                                      difficult area, and is, unfortunately, associated with significant postop pain.

                               Special                DLT; CPB; NG tube; Cell Saver; rapid-infusion device
                                 instrumentation

                               Unique                 OLV with collapse of left lung necessary for most cases. Cold LR may be injected into renal or visceral
                                 considerations       arteries for organ preservation. Alternatively, operation can be performed under profound hypothermic
                                                      circulatory arrest for spinal cord protection in patients with chronic dissections. Frequently, operation is
                                                      performed with only proximal cross-clamping; so there may be an obligate ongoing blood loss.

                               Antibiotics            Cefazolin 2 g iv

                               Surgical time          6 h. Proximal aortic cross-clamping until completion of visceral revascularization may extend to
                                                      60 min. Longer cross-clamp times may be anticipated in patients with aneurysmal dilation from
                                                      chronic aortic dissection for which profound hypothermic circulatory arrest may be utilized.

===== PAGE 425 =====
Repair of Aneurysms of the Thoracoabdominal Aorta           425

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Closing                OR → ICU, intubated × 24–72 h.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Ongoing back-bleeding from visceral and iliac vessels results in substantial volume loss during
                                            cross-clamping. Most red-cell volume is salvaged via cardiotomy suckers and returned through
                                            cardiopulmonary bypass circuit or via a RBC salvage system (e.g., Cell Saver).

                     Postop care            ICU, intubated and ventilated × 24–72 h. Rewarming, hemodynamic monitoring, and volume
                                            resuscitation are often required in ICU.

                                              Aneurysm Group:                      Type I          Type II         Type III        Type IV

                     Mortality                Overall: 9%                          —               10–25%          —               5%

                     Morbidity                Paraplegia/spinal cord ischemia      6%              15%             3%              2%
                                              Other neurological complications     6%              12%             2%              1%
                                              Renal insufficiency                  —               2–5%            —               —
                                              Respiratory failure                  —               10%             —               —
                                              Hemorrhage                           Common          ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                              Graft infection                      —               1–6%            —               —
                                              MI                                   Rare            ⇐               ⇐               ⇐

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                                              Graft failure                        —               Rare            —               —

                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                                              False aneurysm                       Rare            ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                              Embolization                         Rare            ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                              Bowel ischemia                       —               2–10%           —               —
                                              Impotence                            Rare            ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                              Ureteral injury                      Rare            ⇐               ⇐               ⇐

                     Pain score               6–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Non-Marfan: 55–75 yr; Marfan: 35–55 yr

                     Male:Female            3:1

                     Incidence              < 5 cases/yr in most hospitals, except major referral centers

                     Etiology               Predominantly atherosclerotic. Patients with Marfan syndrome may present with a progressive
                                            dilatation of a chronic dissection.

                     Associated             HTN (75%); CAD (30%); COPD (30%); renal insufficiency (15%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE E
                   Sx are usually of sudden onset and depend on the site of dissection and specific organ involvement. Initial treatment
                   involves the use of antihypertensive medications (e.g., SNP) to control BP and β-blockers (e.g., esmolol) to ↓ contrac-
                   tility. Patients presenting electively for thoracotomy (descending aorta) may have a thoracic epidural catheter placed
                   the night before surgery. These patients are only heparinized during the procedure.

                    Respiratory              Chronic pulmonary disease is associated with postop morbidity. Preop preparation with
                                             bronchodilators, cessation of smoking, incentive spirometry, and chest physiotherapy may
                                             decrease the risk of postop problems.
                                             Tests: CXR: ✓ for distortion of the left mainstem bronchus, which may affect placement of
                                             the DLT. May need PFTs, ABG to determine severity of pulmonary disease.

===== PAGE 426 =====
426    c h a p t e r 6.3    Vascular Surgery

                              Cardiovascular           CAD is the most frequent cause of periop and late death in elective thoracoabdominal
                                                       aortic aneurysm repair. It is commonly associated with HTN.
                                                       Tests: ECG: ✓ for LVH and ischemia.

                              Neurological             Increased risk of spinal cord ischemia with cross-clamping of the aorta; therefore, any
                                                       preop neurologic deficits should be well documented. The use of CSF drainage and/or
                                                       deep hypothermic circulatory arrest may be protective in patients with chronic aortic
                                                       dissections.

                              Renal                    Preop renal dysfunction increases the potential for postop renal problems. Aneurysmal
                                                       involvement of the renal arteries also may occur.
                                                       Tests: BUN; Cr. Consider creatinine clearance.

                              Gastrointestinal         Aneurysmal involvement of the inferior mesenteric and superior mesenteric arteries may
                                                       cause visceral ischemia.
                                                       Tests: Consider abdominal x-ray (ileus) and ABG (metabolic acidosis).

                              Hematologic              Preexisting coagulopathy increases risk. Many patients have been on aspirin preop.
                                                       Excessive alcohol use is associated with anemia, thrombocytopenia, and low production
                                                        of vitamin K-dependent factors. Rarely, a DIC process may occur within the lumen of the
                                                        aneurysm.
                                                        Tests: PT; PTT; Plt count; Hct
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                              Laboratory               Electrolytes; radiologic assessment of aneurysm (ultrasonography, CT, and arteriography)

                              Premedication            Anxiety and pain may contribute to HTN and risk of aneurysmal rupture. Rx: morphine
                                                       0.1 mg/kg iv and midazolam 1–5 mg iv. Full-stomach precautions for emergent procedures
                                                       (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg iv, ranitidine 50 mg iv).

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GETA. The goals of anesthesia for this procedure are (a) preserve myocardial, renal, pul-
                             monary, CNS, and visceral organ function; (b) maintain adequate intravascular volume so that CO is not impaired;
                             (c) control BP so that the transmural pressure across the aneurysm does not increase, which would increase the risk
                             of rupture; and (d) provide good perfusion of other organs. CPB is used to accomplish deep hypothermic circulatory
                             arrest. The rationale for this use is controversial. Deep hypothermic cardiac arrest (DHCA) may confer spinal cord
                             protection and is usually reserved for patients with chronic dissections. Removal of CSF has been proposed as an-
                             other means of protecting the spinal cord against ischemic injury. CPB also may be used for distal perfusion of organs
                             and afterload protection of the left ventricle. Partial CPB usually is reserved for suprarenal or supraceliac aneurysms
                             to perfuse bowel and kidneys. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cardiopulmonary Bypass, p. 350, and Repair of
                             Acute Aortic Dissections, p. 418, for more discussion on CPB and DHCA.)

                              Induction                Prevent hypertensive response to laryngoscopy and intubation with moderate-dose
                                                       narcotic technique (fentanyl 10–20 mcg/kg or sufentanil 1–2 mcg/kg) in combination
                                                       with etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg) or propofol (1–2 mg/kg). Esmolol 100–500 mcg/kg over
                                                       1 min, NTG 0.5–3 mcg/kg, or lidocaine administered either by topical spray or an iv dose
                                                       of 1.5 mg/kg also will decrease the cardiovascular response to intubation. Muscle relax-
                                                       ation for intubation may be achieved with vecuronium (beware of ↓ HR) or rocuronium
                                                       (1 mg/kg). A modified rapid-sequence induction may be necessary in emergent cases. A
                                                       DLT is mandatory for this procedure; however it may be difficult to position due to dis-
                                                       torted anatomy. FOB is mandatory to verify position of DLT.

                              Maintenance              O2/air/narcotic, ± low-dose volatile agent. Benzodiazepines may be used for amnesia (e.g.,
                                                       midazolam 100 mcg/kg). When epidural catheter in place, sufentanil (loading dose 25–50
                                                       mcg, followed by 4–6 mcg/h) may provide adequate additional analgesia. In hemodynami-
                                                       cally unstable patients, scopolamine (400 mcg) provides amnesia. Maintain CO and con-
                                                       trol of BP at preop levels. These patients may have increased hemodynamic variability on
                                                       cross-clamping aorta, 2° bleeding, and coexisting disease. Keeping the patient warm may
                                                       be difficult due to large incision and visceral exposure.

===== PAGE 427 =====
Repair of Aneurysms of the Thoracoabdominal Aorta         427

                    Emergence         Deferred to ICU. Postop ventilation 24–72 h. DLT may need to be maintained postop 2° to
                                      facial, oral, and airway edema.

                    Blood and fluid   Anticipate large blood loss.         Large incision and visceral exposure requires ad-
                       requirements   IV: 14 ga or 7 Fr × 2                ministration of large volumes of fluid. Consider use
                                      Rapid infuser                        of mannitol or furosemide if concerned about renal
                                      Cell Saver                           function and UO.
                                      T&C 8–10 U PRBCs.
                                      Warm fluids and humidify gases.
                                      Maintain UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h.

                    Monitoring        Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                      CVP
                                      ± PA catheter                        ✓ for ↑ PA pressures and PCWP, ↓ in CO, TEE wall
                                      ± ST segment analysis                motion abnormalities, and changes in SV. Consult
                                      Arterial line                        with surgeon regarding placement of cross-clamp
                                      UO                                   so arterial line will not be affected.
                                      TEE                                  TEE is a good monitor for ventricular filling and
                                                                           myocardial ischemia.
                                      Core temperature                     Monitor core T (esophageal, bladder). Tympanic
                                                                           membrane T (indicative of brain T) is monitored

                                                                                                                                          Cardiovascular
                                                                           for circulatory arrest cases.

                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                                      ± EEG, SSEP, MEP                     EEG and EPs may be useful in assessment of cere-
                                                                           bral protection (SSEP) and spinal cord perfusion
                                                                           problems (MEP ± SSEP).
                                      ± Cerebral oxymetry                  In case of the need of DHCA, cerebral oxymetry
                                                                           may be helpful in monitoring cerebral blood flow.

                    Cross-clamping    Clamping                             Application of cross-clamp at supraceliac level
                                                                           probably produces the greatest hemodynamic stress
                                                                           experienced by surgical patients. Application of the
                                                                           clamp may → HTN and ischemia. Preload, after-
                                                                           load, and HR can be controlled with SNP (0.25–5,
                                                                           mcg/kg/min) and esmolol (100–500 mcg/kg/min)
                                                                           infusions. Bolus dose NTG (100 mcg) may be useful
                                                                           to terminate an acute hypertensive episode.
                                      Unclamping                           Ensure adequate volume; replace blood loss. Just
                                                                           before removal of the cross-clamp, filling volumes
                                                                           are allowed to rise gradually, avoiding the occur-
                                                                           rence of myocardial ischemia. Dilators are D/C’d.
                                                                           ↓ BP may occur with removal of cross-clamp 2°
                                                                           hypovolemia, reactive hyperemia, acidosis, ↑ K+,
                                                                           or myocardial dysfunction. BE > -5 should be cor-
                                                                           rected before unclamping. If necessary, surgeon can
                                                                           reclamp or occlude the aorta.

                    Positioning       Right axillary roll                  Right lateral decubitus with hips rotated posteri-
                                      ✓ and pad pressure points            orly. Left arm placed in airplane sling or supported
                                      ✓ eyes                               by pillows.

                    Complications     Myocardial ischemia
                                      HTN
                                      Coagulopathy                         Coagulopathy due to dilutional and consumptive
                                      Hemorrhage                           processes.
                                      Hemostasis
                                      Hypothermia                          Hypothermia may exacerbate coagulopathy, cause
                                      Other organ ischemia                 dysrhythmias, and depress cardiac contractility.

===== PAGE 428 =====
428    c h a p t e r 6.3        Vascular Surgery

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications                Myocardial ischemia                           BP should be closely controlled postop to decrease
                                                           Neurologic deficits 2° cerebral or            bleeding from graft site and raw surfaces.
                                                             spinal cord ischemia
                                                           Renal failure
                                                           Respiratory failure

                              Pain                         Epidural narcotics (p. C-3)                   In selected patients, a thoracic epidural catheter
                                management                                                               may be placed the night before surgery; otherwise,
                                                                                                         an epidural is placed only after normal neurologic
                                                                                                         and coagulation status is determined.

                              Tests                        CXR: line and ETT placement
                                                           Coagulation profile
                                                           ABG analysis

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Cambria RP, Clouse WD, Davison JK, et al: Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: results with 337 operations performed over
                                   a 15-year interval. Ann Surg 2002; 236:471–9.
     Cardiovascular

                                2. Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Davison JK, et al: Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: a 20-year perspective. Ann Thorac Surg
        Surgery

                                   2007; 83:S856–61.
                                3. Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA: Open surgical repair of 2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg
                                   2007; 83:S862–4
                                4. Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Miller CC, et al: Mortality and paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a risk factor
                                   analysis. Ann Thorac Surg 2000; 69:408–14.
                                5. Dong CCJ, MacDonald DB, Janusz MT: Intraoperative spinal cord monitoring during descending thoracic and
                                   thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2002; 74:S1874–76.
                                6. Fann JI: Descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Coron Artery Dis 2002; 13:93–102.
                                7. Fedorow CA, Moon MC, Mutch WA, Grocott HP: Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid drainage for thoracoabdominal aortic surgery:
                                   rationale and practical considerations for management. Anesth Analg 2010; 111:46–58.
                                8. Fischbein MP, Miller DC: Long-term durability of open thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair. Semin Vasc Surg
                                   2009; 22:74–80.
                                9. Jacobs MJ, Mommertz G, Koeppel TA, et al: Surgical repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Cardiovasc Surg 2007;
                                   48:49–58.
                               10. Kazama S, Masaki Y, Maruyama S, et al: Effect of altering cerebrospinal fluid pressure on spinal cord blood flow. Ann Thorac
                                   Surg 1994; 58(1):112–5.
                               11. Levine WC, Lee JJ, Black JH, et al: Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: anesthetic management. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2005;
                                   43:39–60.
                               12. Lima B, Nowicki ER, Blackstone EH, et al: Spinal cord protective strategies during descending and thoracoabdominal aortic
                                   aneurysm repair in the modern era: the role of intrathecal papaverine. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2012; 143:945–52.
                               13. Ling E, Arrellano R: Systematic overview of the evidence supporting the use of cerebrospinal fluid drainage in thoracoabdominal
                                   aneurysm surgery for prevention of paraplegia. Anesthesiology 2000; 93:1115–22.
                               14. Lips J, de Haan P, de Jager S, et al: The role of transcranial motor evoked potentials in predicting neurologic and histopathologic
                                   outcome after experimental spinal cord ischemia. Anesthesiology 2002; 97:183–91.
                               15. Wong DR, Parenti JL, Green ST, et al: Open repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm in the modern surgical era:
                                   contemporary outcomes in 509 patients. J Am Coll Surg 2011; 212:569–79.

                             SURGERY OF THE ABDOMINAL AORTA
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Operations on the abdominal aorta are generally performed for aneurysmal or occlusive diseases.
                             Although aortic aneurysms may involve the suprarenal aorta, the majority are infrarenal in origin and may extend
                             into the iliac arteries (Fig. 6.3-7). Most (> 95%) are asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally during investigation
                             of another medical problem. Because of the associated increased risk for rupture as the aneurysm increases in size,
                             most vascular surgeons recommend prophylactic repair for aneurysms > 5 cm in cross-section dimension. Repair

===== PAGE 429 =====
Surgery of the Abdominal Aorta        429

                                                                                        Superior mesenteric
                                                                                        artery
                                                                                                              Left renal
                                                                                                              artery and
                                          Duodenum                                                            vein

                                                                                                                  Left
                                                                                                                  kidney

                                      Right
                                      kidney                                                                      Lumbar
                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                  vein
                                                                                                                  v

                                                                                                     Inferior
                                                                                                     mesenteric
                                                                                                     artery

                                                                                                                                                       Cardiovascular
                                                                                                       Aneurysm

                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                                                     Ureter                                               Iliac artery
                                                                                                          and vein

                                                  Figure 6.3-7. Aneurysm of the abdominal aorta.

                   also is indicated for painful aneurysms, those that have been associated with atheroembolism, and when there is
                   documented recent increase in size or evidence of leak or rupture. CAD coexists in 30–40% of these patients and
                   should be assessed preop.
                   Endovascular stent-grafting of abdominal aortic aneurysm has emerged as an alternative therapeutic approach.
                   The open surgical repair may be either transperitoneal or retroperitoneal (Fig. 6.3-8). After exposure of the
                   abdominal aorta from the level of the renal vein distally to the iliac arteries, the aorta is cross-clamped, distally at
                    first to prevent atheroembolism, and then proximally. Graft origin is usually from the infrarenal aorta, but may arise
                    from the intramesenteric aorta or even the supraceliac aorta. Graft termination may be to the distal aorta above the
                    bifurcation (tube graft), to the common or external iliac arteries (Y graft), or the femoral arteries. Immediately prior
                    to cross-clamping, vasodilators are increased to reduce afterload, which is significantly increased with application
                    of the aortic cross-clamp. The aorta is then incised, lumbar vessels oversewn, and the aorta transected to allow an
                    interposition graft to be sewn into place. The retroperitoneal approach has many advocates, as it may require less
                    volume intraop, may be associated with less temperature loss, and may result in a shorter period of postop adynamic
                    ileus. In a randomized, prospective study, however, no significant differences could be detected between these two
                    approaches for blood loss or postop recovery time.
                   Aortoiliac occlusive disease can be a significant cause of lower extremity arterial insufficiency. Although the
                   operative approach may be similar to that for aneurysmal disease, there exists a significant intraop difference in
                    that there are not such profound changes associated with aortic clamping because there is already some element of
                    increased afterload 2° the occlusive disease. Nevertheless, hemodynamic monitoring is mandatory to allow for rapid
                    volume shifts and to ensure adequate preload and sufficient afterload reduction, especially during the period of aortic
                    cross-clamping.

===== PAGE 430 =====
430    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                                          Figure 6.3-8. Retroperitoneal approach to the aorta: the incision is extended from
                                          the tip of the 11th rib or 10th intercostal space laterally toward the midhypogastrium.
                                          (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative
                                          Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                             Variant procedure or approaches: In the rare patient with COPD severe enough to preclude weaning from the
                             ventilator postop, extraanatomic grafts (e.g., axillofemoral, iliofemoral, and fem-fem bypass) can be constructed
                             under local anesthesia.
     Cardiovascular

                             Usual preop diagnosis: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA); severe aortoiliac stenosis sufficient to cause debilitat-
        Surgery

                             ing buttock, thigh, or calf claudication; isolated-inflow (aortoiliac) disease (rarely the sole cause for ischemic symp-
                             toms at rest or for tissue loss, except as a result of embolic complications)

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                       Transperitoneal Approach                                Retroperitoneal Approach

                               Position                Supine                                                  Supine with mild elevation of left flank

                               Incision                Midline abdominal                                       Left subcostal, left oblique, along 10th
                                                                                                               rib toward umbilicus (See Fig. 6.3-8.)

                               Special                 Self-retaining retractor; TEE; If suprarenal change:    ⇐
                                 instrumentation       SMA + renal artery perfusion catheters.

                               Unique                  Will need pharmacologic manipulation to ↓ afterload     ⇐ (The retroperitoneal approach is not
                                 considerations        or ↑ preload coincident with clamping or unclamping     used for emergency cases.)
                                                       of aorta.

                               Antibiotics             Cefazolin 2 g iv                                        ⇐

                               Surgical time           3–5 h                                                   ⇐

                               EBL                     500 mL                                                  ⇐

                               Postop care             ICU 8–16 h, often extubated. Requires aggressive        ⇐
                                                       volume administration to allow for 3rd-space loss
                                                       in 1st 12 h postop. Patient comfort and respiratory
                                                       management markedly improved by epidural cathe-
                                                       ter for postop analgesia. Careful cardiac monitoring.

                               Mortality               2–5% elective; 50% emergent                             ⇐

                               Morbidity               MI: 10–15% (3% fatal)                                   ⇐
                                                       Respiratory insufficiency/pneumonia: 5–10%
                                                       Lower extremity ischemia: 2–5%
                                                       Renal insufficiency: 2–5%
                                                       Bowel complications: 3–4%
                                                       Hemorrhage: 2–4%
                                                       CVA: < 1%
                                                       Infection: < 1%
                                                       Paraplegia: < 0.4%

                               Pain score              8–10                                                    7–10

===== PAGE 431 =====
Surgery of the Abdominal Aorta        431

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             55 yr +

                     Male:Female           4:1

                     Incidence             3% of males > 55 yr; > 5% of patients > 50 yr in a general cardiology clinic; 30–66/1000

                     Etiology              Atherosclerosis; Marfan syndrome; Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; dissection; infection, including syphilis

                     Associated            HTN; CAD; COPD; cerebrovascular disease; renal insufficiency
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for AAA repair are typically older males with multiple coexisting diseases (e.g., CAD, HTN, PVD,
                   COPD). Most commonly these patients are asymptomatic and the Dx is made as an incidental finding during routine
                   exams or other medical procedures; however, some patients may present with severe ↓ BP following aneurysm rup-
                   ture. These patients require prompt resuscitation (SBP goal: 90–100 mm Hg) and emergent aortic cross-clamping.
                   For anesthetic considerations, see Abdominal Trauma: Vascular Injuries (p. 751).

                                                                                                                                                         Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                    Respiratory             Many patients have COPD and a long Hx of smoking. Preop preparation—including bron-
                                            chodilators, cessation of smoking, incentive spirometry, and chest physiotherapy—will ↓
                                            risk of postop complications.
                                            Tests: CXR. May need PFTs and ABG to determine severity of pulmonary disease.

                    Cardiovascular          CAD is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in this patient population.
                                            HTN increases risk of aneurysmal rupture; hence, preop control of BP is essential. 3 BP in
                                            both arms to determine placement of arterial line intraop (arterial line should be placed in
                                            arm with higher BP).
                                            Tests: Radiologic assessment of aneurysm using ultrasonography, CT, arteriography, and
                                            MRI. ECG: 3 for evidence of ischemia, infarction, and LVH. Stress testing, coronary angi-
                                            ography in case of suspicion of coronary disease.

                    Renal                   Chronic renal insufficiency occurs frequently in this patient population 2° HTN, diabetes
                                            mellitus (DM), and atherosclerotic renovascular disease. Hypovolemia 2° radiographic dye
                                            studies and bowel prep → renal failure.
                                            Tests: BUN, Cr; consider creatinine clearance; electrolytes

                    Hematologic             Preop coagulation disorders should be corrected. Many patients are on aspirin, which
                                            should be D/C’d 7 d preop. Alcohol abuse can be associated with anemia, thrombocytope-
                                            nia, and ↓ vitamin K-dependent factors.
                                            Tests: PT; PTT; Hct; Plt

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Anxiety and pain may cause HTN and ↑ risk of aneurysmal rupture. Sedatives and anal-
                                            gesics should be used as indicated (p. B-1). Full-stomach precautions for emergent proce-
                                            dures (p. B-5).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or combination of epidural and GA. The goals of anesthesia are to: (a) preserve myo-
                   cardial, renal, pulmonary, and CNS perfusion; (b) maintain adequate intravascular volume and CO; (c) anticipate
                   the surgical maneuvers that will affect BP and blood volume; and (d) control BP to minimize risk of rupture, while
                   ensuring perfusion of other organs.

===== PAGE 432 =====
432    c h a p t e r 6.3   Vascular Surgery

                              Induction              If it is planned to extubate the patient postop, anesthesia should be induced using fentanyl
                                                     (4–6 mcg/kg) in conjunction with propofol (2 mg/kg) or etomidate (0.2–0.4 mg/kg). If an
                                                     epidural will be used for postop pain management, decrease intraop iv opioid dose. Patients
                                                     with an epidural typically receive morphine (2–4 mg), hydromorphone (0.2–0.8 mg), fentan-
                                                     yl (150–200 mcg), or sufentanil (50 mcg) in 10 mL into the epidural catheter. Local anesthet-
                                                     ics may cause hemodynamic instability after unclamping 2° sympathectomy. Muscle relax-
                                                     ants are chosen to minimize tachycardia or ↓ BP (e.g., vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg or rocuronium
                                                     1 mg/kg). Anesthesia is deepened before intubation by mask ventilation with 1% sevoflurane.
                                                     If there is a hemodynamic response to oral airway insertion, tracheal lidocaine or further an-
                                                     esthetic is given before gentle laryngoscopy and intubation. Etomidate is useful for induction
                                                     in hemodynamically unstable patients. Full-stomach precautions may be necessary.

                              Maintenance            O2/air/narcotic and volatile agent. N2O can be used, but it may cause bowel distention. Com-
                                                     bining epidural and GA offers good abdominal relaxation. Patients receiving epidural local
                                                     anesthesia may require phenylephrine to treat ↓ BP 2° sympathetic blockade. Epidural cath-
                                                     eter placement before systemic anticoagulation is a safe technique. Narcotic epidural analge-
                                                     sia should be given within 1 h of skin incision if morphine 3–8 mg is used. If hydromorphone
                                                     (0.5–0.8 mg) is given epidurally, it is given within 1 h of abdominal closure. Patient may
                                                     become hypothermic 2° large incision with visceral exposure and prolonged operation.
                                                     Normothermic (> 35.5°C) patients who have had uneventful surgery, especially utilizing a
     Cardiovascular

                              Emergence
                                                     retroperitoneal approach, are frequently extubated in the OR or shortly after arrival in the
        Surgery

                                                     ICU. Patients with significant cardiac or pulmonary disease generally are left intubated and
                                                     weaned from the ventilator in the ICU. Prevention of HTN and tachycardia during emer-
                                                     gence may require titration of β-adrenergic-blocking drugs (e.g., esmolol 50–300 mcg/kg/
                                                     min) and/or vasodilators (e.g., SNP 0.25–2.0 mcg/kg/min) or NTG (0.25–2.0 mcg/kg/min).
                                                     Epidural morphine (2–4 mg) or hydromorphone (0.5–0.8 mg) is given ~60 min before the
                                                     end of surgery. It is important to ensure full reversal from neuromuscular blockade.

                              Blood and fluid        Major blood loss                        Use of rapid infusion and blood-salvaging devices
                                 requirements        iv: 14 ga (or 7 Fr) × 2                 helpful. Consider acute normovolemic hemodilu-
                                                     4 U PRBC                                tion. Hemorrhage should be treated with crystal-
                                                     UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h                        loid, colloid, or blood products as appropriate.
                                                     Warm all fluids.                        Upper-body Bair-Hugger or equivalent.
                                                     Humidify all gases.

                              Monitoring             Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Monitor for cardiac ischemia. Automated ST seg-
                                                                                             ment analysis is useful.
                                                     CVP line                                The measurement of CVP may be sufficient in pa-
                                                                                             tients with good ventricular function and exercise
                                                                                             tolerance.
                                                     PA catheter                             In patients with recent MI, Hx of CHF, Hx of un-
                                                                                             stable angina, multisystem disease, or in those pre-
                                                                                             senting emergently (without the benefit of a com-
                                                                                             plete workup) a PA catheter is appropriate.
                                                     TEE                                     TEE is invaluable for assessing cardiac changes 2°
                                                                                             cross-clamping and unclamping the aorta.
                                                     Arterial line                           The arterial line is generally placed in the radial artery
                                                     Urinary catheter                        of the arm having the higher BP (if difference exists).

                              Cross-clamping         ↑↑ Afterload → HTN                      Application of aortic cross-clamp causes HTN
                                                     ↓ Preload                               proximal to the clamp. In a healthy heart, this is well
                                                     ↑ Filling pressures                     tolerated, with minimal increase in filling pressure.
                                                     ± ↓ Spinal cord perfusion               In case of poor left ventricular function, filling pres-
                                                     ± ↓ Renal perfusion                     sures generally rise. Control of preload, afterload,
                                                     ↓ Perfusion to viscera below            and HR can be accomplished with vasodilators and
                                                       the clamp                             β-blockers.
                                                     ABGs/electrolytes regularly

===== PAGE 433 =====
Surgery of the Abdominal Aorta           433

                    Cross-clamping                                                        Negative inotropic agents (e.g., β-blockers, inhala-
                      (cont’d)                                                            tional anesthetics) are used cautiously. Occlusion of
                                                                                          infrarenal aorta → ↓ renal blood flow. Ensure ade-
                                                                                          quate intravascular volume and CO. Administer man-
                                                                                          nitol (0.25–0.5 g/kg) before clamping to maintain UO.

                    Aortic                     ↓↓ Afterload                               Immediately before unclamping, D/C dilators and
                      unclamping               Volume loading                             negative inotropic agents. Gradually increase fill-
                                               Lactate washout                            ing pressures (volume loading) to avoid myocardial
                                               ± Phenylephrine                            ischemia. ↓↓ BP may occur with removal of cross-
                                                                                          clamp 2° to hypovolemia, reperfusion, or myocar-
                                                                                          dial dysfunction. Reperfusion of lower limbs and
                                                                                          washout of lactate does not usually require use of
                                                                                          HCO3. Patients with an epidural sympathetic block
                                                                                          often require phenylephrine support during un-
                                                                                          clamping. The surgeon can reclamp or occlude the
                                                                                          aorta if ↓↓ BP persists. If hemodynamically stable
                                                                                          with ↓ UO, consider furosemide 20–80 mg.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                                                                                                                                                               Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                    Complications              Myocardial ischemia
                                               HTN
                                               Hemorrhage
                                               Coagulopathy
                                               Hypothermia                                Hypothermia may cause dysrhythmias, depress
                                               Organ ischemia                             contractility, and exacerbate coagulopathy.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Myocardial ischemia
                                               Renal failure
                                               Respiratory failure

                    Pain                       Epidural narcotics (p. C-1)
                      management

                    Tests                      CXR to 3 line and ETT                      BP should be closely controlled postop to decrease
                                                 placement                                bleeding from graft site and raw surfaces.
                                               ABG
                                               Coagulation profile
                                               BUN; Cr

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Arko FR, Lee WA, Hill BB, et al: Aneurysm-related death: primary endpoint analysis for comparison of open and endovascular
                        repair. J Vasc Surg 2002; 36:297–304.
                     2. Boccara G, Jaber S, Eliet J, et al: Monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide partial pressure changes during infrarenal aortic
                        cross-clamping: a non-invasive method to predict unclamping hypotension. Acta Anesthesiol Scand 2001; 45:188–93.
                     3. Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Pedraza JD, et al: Long-term durability of open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2007;
                        46:669–75.
                     4. Filinger M: Who should we operate on and how do we decide: predicting rupture and survival in patients with aortic
                        aneurysm. Semin Vasc Surg 2007; 20:121–7.
                     5. Gold MS, DeCrosta D, Rizzuto C, et al: The effect of lumbar epidural and general anesthesia on plasma catecholamines and
                        hemodynamics during abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Anesth Analg 1994; 78(2):225–30.
                     6. Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al: Open versus Endovascular Repair (OVER) Veteran Affairs Cooperative Study
                        Group: outcomes following endovascular vs open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a randomized trial. JAMA 2009;
                        302:1532–42.
                     7. Nishimori M, Ballantyne JC, Low JHS: Epidural pain relief versus systemic opioid-based pain relief for abdominal aortic
                        surgery (Cochrane Reviews). Cochrane Library 2006; 3:1577.

===== PAGE 434 =====
434    c h a p t e r 6.3        Vascular Surgery

                                8. Panaretou V, Toufekzian L, Siafaka I, et al: Postoperative pulmonary function after open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in
                                   patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: epidural versus intravenous analgesia. Ann Vasc Surg 2012; 26:149–55.
                                9. Patra P, Chaillou P, Bizouarn P: Intraoperative autotransfusion for repair of unruptured aneurysms of the infrarenal abdominal
                                   aorta. J Cardiovasc Surg 2000; 41:407–13.
                               10. Rutherford RB: Open versus endovascular stent graft repair for abdominal aortic aneurysm: an historical review. Semin Vasc
                                   Surg 2012; 25:39–48.
                               11. Smaka TJ, Cobas M, Velasquez OC, Lubarsky DA: Perioperative management of endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm
                                   repair. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2011; 25:166–176.
                               12. Sprung J, Abdelmalak B, Gottlieb A, et al: Analysis of risk factors for myocardial infarction and cardiac mortality after major
                                   vascular surgery. Anesthesiology 2000; 93:129–40.
                               13. Takayama T, Yamanouchi D: Aneurysm disease: the abdominal aorta. Surg Clin N Am 2013; 93:877–91.
                               14. Tang TY, Walsh SR, Fanshawe TR, et al: Comparison of risk-scoring methods in predicting the immediate outcome after
                                   elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2007; 34:505–13.
                               15. Tsai S, Conrad MF, Patel VI, et al: Durability of open repair of juxtarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg 2012; 56:2–7.
                               16. Young EL, Holt PJ, Poloniecki JD, et al: Meta-analysis and systematic review of the relationship between surgeon annual
                                   caseload and mortality for elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm repairs. J Vasc Surg 2007; 46:1287–94.

                             INFRAINGUINAL ARTERIAL BYPASS
     Cardiovascular

                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
        Surgery

                             Description: Due to the limited durability of distal bypass procedures, surgical bypass to the infrainguinal arteries is
                             indicated only for salvage of the severely ischemic lower extremity, as manifest by gangrene, ischemic ulceration, or
                             ischemic rest pain. Less frequently, it is used to alleviate functional ischemia of claudication, or leg discomfort with
                             exercise. Its use is predicated on the existence of adequate inflow to the level of the groin or femoral artery. Other
                             necessary components include an adequate target vessel, preferably in continuity with runoff into the plantar arch of
                             the foot, and an adequate conduit, preferably autologous saphenous vein. Long-term patency rates of nonautologous
                             conduits to the below-knee arteries are distinctly inferior to that of saphenous vein and should be avoided whenever
                             possible. This population, almost by definition, includes patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), CAD, and cerebrovas-
                             cular disease, all of which must be assessed preop.
                             The operative repair usually involves incisions at the groin and distal bypass sites to expose the donor and re-
                             cipient arteries and to harvest leg or arm venous conduit. The operative approaches are rather similar. An unob-
                             structed inflow source—usually the common femoral, superficial femoral, or deep femoral artery—is exposed in
                             the groin. The target distal artery, usually at the level of the knee or below, can be approached through a medial
                             incision. More distally, the peroneal and anterior tibial arteries can be approached laterally at the midtibial level.
                             At the level of the malleolus, both the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries can be revascularized. After
                             control of donor and recipient vessels, an anatomic tunnel is created, and the bypass conduit (saphenous vein,
                             prosthetic graft) is passed through its length. After administration of 10,000 U of heparin, the distal anastomosis
                             is constructed first, followed by the proximal anastomosis. A completion arteriogram confirms unobstructed
                             flow. Heparin is then partially reversed and meticulous hemostasis obtained, and the wounds are closed.
                             Although conventional wisdom has held that the anesthetic and operative risks for patients undergoing distal re-
                             constructions are low, there may be little difference in postop morbidity and mortality when compared with patients
                             undergoing a major inflow procedure within the abdomen.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Severe peripheral vascular disease (PVD); CAD; DM; HTN; obstructive PA disease. (These
                             are almost ubiquitous comorbidities.)

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                   Supine

                               Incision                   Groin, medial knee, ± distal leg incisions; + incision to harvest venous conduit

                               Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g iv at induction of anesthesia

                               Surgical time              2–5 h

===== PAGE 435 =====
Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass   435

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Closing                Optimization of coagulation status
                       considerations

                     EBL                    200–300 mL

                     Postop care            Possible ICU × 24 h; patients are at risk for myocardial ischemia.

                     Mortality              2–4%

                     Morbidity              MI: 5–12%
                                            Respiratory insufficiency: 5%
                                            Infection: 2–5%
                                            Amputation: 2–4%
                                            CVA: <1%

                     Pain score             4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              > 55 yr (mean age = > 70 yr)

                                                                                                                                                          Cardiovascular
                     Male:Female            4:1

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                     Incidence              Claudication fairly common in elderly; however, 75% will remain untreated, but stable, over
                                            2–5 yr, with < 5% requiring amputation.

                     Etiology               Arteriosclerosis (primarily); chronic embolic disease (rare); vasculitis; popliteal artery entrap-
                                            ment; cystic adventitial disease of popliteal artery

                     Associated             CAD; cerebrovascular disease; DM; HTN; COPD
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: infrainguinal arterial bypass; arterial embolectomy; lumbar sympathectomy; venous
                   thrombectomy or vein excision)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for peripheral vascular surgery may suffer from major systemic diseases, including CAD, HTN,
                   and DM. Three types of occlusive vascular disease have been described: Type 1—isolated to the aortic and iliac bifur-
                   cations; is not associated with CAD. Type 2—diffuse pattern involving coronary and cerebral circulations; associated
                   with a higher incidence of DM and HTN. Type 3—involves small vessels, especially of the lower limbs; associated
                   with higher postop morbidity and mortality.

                   Respiratory              Vascular patients frequently have Hx of smoking and COPD. Preop evaluation of pulmo-
                                            nary function helps to determine whether regional vs GA is appropriate, while providing
                                            baseline values for postop comparison.
                                            Tests: CXR; consider PFTs; ABG

                   Cardiovascular           Vascular surgery of the lower extremities is often associated with ↑ morbidity and mortal-
                                            ity 2° ↑ incidence of CAD and HTN in this patient population.
                                            Tests: ECG: 3 for LVH and ischemia; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                   Neurological             ↑ incidence of cerebrovascular disease. Careful neurological assessment is necessary to
                                            document existing deficits.

===== PAGE 436 =====
436    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                              Endocrine                ↑ incidence of DM, which may be associated with peripheral and autonomic neuropathies
                                                       (silent MI, labile BP) and delayed gastric emptying. Insulin requirements for most diabetic
                                                       patients can be managed by administering one-half the usual a.m. dose of insulin, once a
                                                       dextrose-containing iv (e.g., D5LR) has been established. Frequent blood glucose measure-
                                                       ments should be made periop.

                              Renal                    There is a higher incidence of renal artery disease and renal insufficiency in this patient
                                                       population.
                                                       Tests: BUN; Cr; consider creatinine clearance; electrolytes; UA

                              Hematologic              Many patients presenting for this surgery are taking anticoagulant/anti-Plt medications.
                                                       Inquire as to bleeding or bruising tendency.
                                                       Tests: Hct; Plt; consider PT, PTT.

                              Laboratory               As indicated from H&P

                              Premedication            Continue usual medications up to time of surgery. Anxiety can contribute to HTN and
                                                       tachycardia. Premedicate conservatively (midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv) for geriatric patients. If
                                                       ischemic pain is present, a narcotic such as fentanyl (25–50 mcg iv) can be given. Avoid im
                                                       administration in patients on anticoagulant therapy.
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: Either regional anesthesia or GETA may be used. For infrainguinal arterial bypass, there
                             is evidence that regional anesthesia is superior for promoting graft survival. To date, no study has shown a differ-
                             ence in patient mortality between these anesthetic techniques. Lumbar sympathectomy may be accomplished with
                             regional or GA. For thrombectomy, GETA with IPPV may reduce the risk of pulmonary emboli.
                             General anesthesia:

                              Induction               Hemodynamic stability is important; therefore, a slow, gradual induction is carried out.
                                                      Preoxygenation is followed by smooth iv induction, using small, incremental doses of fen-
                                                      tanyl (1–3 mcg/kg); then propofol is given in divided doses until the patient is asleep.
                                                      Alternatively, if the LV function is poor, etomidate (0.2 mg/kg iv) in combination with
                                                      fentanyl (100–200 mcg) is appropriate. A full dose of muscle relaxant (vecuronium or
                                                      rocuronium) is given, and ventilation is controlled. Muscle relaxation is not necessary
                                                      during the procedure, but muscle relaxant is given to facilitate intubation. The muscle
                                                      relaxant is chosen to avoid undesirable effects on HR.

                              Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3) with fentanyl (1–2 mcg/kg/h). Continued muscle relaxation
                                                      is usually unnecessary. These surgical procedures are associated with minimal hemodynamic
                                                      instability.

                              Emergence               Tracheal extubation should be based on standard criteria, such as adequacy of ventila-
                                                      tion, return of airway reflexes and reversal of muscle relaxation. Control of BP is accom-
                                                      plished with vasodilators (e.g., NTG 0.1–4.0 mcg/kg/min or SNP 0.25–5.0 mcg/kg/min).
                                                      Esmolol can be given in incremental doses of 10 mg or by infusion (50–200 mcg/kg/min).

                             Regional anesthesia: Patients presenting for regional anesthesia must have a normal coagulation profile; also, they
                             cannot be on heparin (including low molecular weight), urokinase, or streptokinase. The important goals in regional
                             anesthesia are to achieve hemodynamic stability while establishing an adequate block. An epidural or spinal c atheter
                             (multiorifice) is frequently used to infuse local anesthetic for a gradual onset and to prevent an excessively high
                             block. Hemodynamic stability can be improved by infusing 500–1000 mL of NS/LR before performing the block.
                             The patient may be placed in the lateral decubitus position (with operative side down), which may provide a denser
                             and more prolonged block on that side. Achieving a T8-T10 level is optimal. Overzealous hydration may → CHF in
                             this patient population, when the vasodilation 2° regional sympathectomy dissipates. The use of regional anesthesia
                             in patients who will receive intraop anticoagulation is controversial. We feel it is a relatively safe procedure and have

===== PAGE 437 =====
Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass     437

                   not had a complication with this technique. If blood is aspirated after placement of an epidural, we remove the cath-
                   eter and then replace it at a different interspace. Patients on minidose heparin should have a normal PTT before use
                   of regional anesthesia.

                    Spinal                  One-shot spinal: 1% hyperbaric tetracaine (6–10 mg) or 0.75% bupivacaine (10–15 mg).
                                            Add epinephrine 0.2 mg (generally increases duration of block about 50%) or phenyleph-
                                            rine 5 mg (generally increases duration of block about 100%). Do not add vasoconstrictor
                                            if patient is diabetic. Large doses of hyperbaric local anesthetic should be avoided as they
                                            may cause postop cauda equina syndrome.
                                            Continuous spinal: A 20-ga catheter is placed via an 18-ga Tuohy needle. 0.5% hyperbaric
                                            tetracaine or 0.75% bupivacaine is titrated to desired anesthetic level (T8-T10). Catheters
                                            should be redosed every 60–80 min or as soon as BP trends upward. The risk of spinal
                                            headache is very low with continuous spinals.

                    Epidural                Lidocaine 2% with 1:200,000 epinephrine or 0.5% bupivacaine is used. Titrate to desired
                                            anesthetic level (T8-T10).

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 14 or 16 ga × 1                Minimal-to-moderate blood loss. Use forced-air warm-
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h                er (e.g., Bair-Hugger).
                                             Warm fluids.
                                             Humidify gases.

                                                                                                                                                    Cardiovascular
                                             Maintain UO 0.5–1 mL/kg/h.

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                             Arterial line                      An arterial line is most often used in patients with se-
                                             ST-segment analysis                vere cardiopulmonary disease or brittle diabetes. Blood
                                                                                sampling for ABGs, electrolytes, glucose, and Hct is
                                                                                facilitated by the use of an arterial line.
                                             ± CVP/PA catheters                 CVP and PA catheters are not used routinely because
                                             ± TEE                              large changes in intravascular volumes are uncommon.
                                                                                Patients with poor LV function, recent MI, or severe val-
                                                                                vular disease may need PA and/or TEE monitoring.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points          Diabetic patients may be at risk of skin ischemia due
                                             3 eyes                             to poor positioning or inadequate padding of limbs,
                                                                                etc.

                    Complications            HTN
                                             Ischemic reperfusion syndrome Reperfusion of an ischemic limb → ↓ pH, ↑ K+, and re-
                                                (postembolectomy)          lease of myoglobin from injured muscle → ATN.
                                             Hypothermia
                                             Hemorrhage

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications           CHF                                     Infrainguinal bypass: Avoid overhydration; when epi-
                                                                                    dural sympathectomy fades, these patients are at in-
                                                                                    creased risk for CHF. Maintain normovolemia so that
                                                                                    peripheral vasoconstriction (which may limit outflow
                                                                                    to the graft) does not occur.
                                            Hypothermia                             Hypothermia causes vasoconstriction and also may
                                            Graft occlusion                         limit outflow to the graft.

                    Pain                     Epidural/spinal opiates (p. C-2)       Epidural (or spinal) catheter may be used for postop
                      management             PCA                                    analgesia (p. C-3).

                    Tests                    CXR if central line placed
                                             Hct

===== PAGE 438 =====
438    c h a p t e r 6.3       Vascular Surgery

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Chung J, Bartelson BB, Hiatt WR, et al: Wound healing and functional outcomes after infrainguinal bypass with reversed
                                   saphenous vein for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg 2006; 43:1183–90.
                                2. Clair D, Shah S, Weber J: Current state of diagnosis and management of critical limb ischemia. Curr Cardiol Rep 2012; 14:
                                   160–70.
                                3. Conte MA: Critical appraisal of surgical revascularization for critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg 2013; 57:8s–13s.
                                4. Damask MC, Weissman C, Barth A, et al: General vs epidural—which is the better anesthetic technique for femoral-popliteal
                                   bypass surgery? Anesth Analg 1986; 65:539.
                                5. Denny N, Masters R, Pearson D, et al: Postdural puncture headache after continuous spinal anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1987;
                                   66(8):791–4.
                                6. Hull DJ, Kizilgul M, Aung W, Rousillon K, Keely EC: Frequency of coronary artery disease in patients undergoing peripheral
                                   artery disease surgery. Am J Cardiol 2012; 110:736–40.
                                7. Singh N, Sidawy AN, Dezee K, et al: The effects of the type of anesthesia in outcomes of lower extremity infrainguinal bypass.
                                   J Vasc Surg 2006; 44:964–8.
                                8. Taylor SM, Cull DL, Kalbaugh CA, et al: Critical analysis of clinical success after surgical bypass for lower-extremity ischemic
                                   tissue loss using a standardized definition combining multiple parameters: a new paradigm of outcomes assessment. J Am
                                   Coll Surg 2007; 204:831–8.

                             ARTERIAL EMBOLECTOMY
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: The etiology of acute arterial insufficiency is often the result of thromboembolism, which is usually of
                             cardiac origin. Patients at high risk for embolization are those with MI, mitral stenosis, or atrial fibrillation (AF), all
                             of which increase the risk of intracardiac thrombus formation. Noncardiac causes include thoracic and abdominal
                             aortic pathology, such as aneurysms, severe atherosclerotic disease, and paradoxical embolus via a patent foramen
                             ovale (PFO). The emboli usually become lodged at tapering regions and branch sites and most commonly involve the
                             extremities; the cerebrovascular and mesenteric vasculature also may be involved. In the lower extremities, emboli
                             frequently lodge at the iliac, femoral, or popliteal arteries; the common femoral artery is involved in up to 50% of all
                             embolic events. Emboli to the upper extremities typically affect the brachial artery. Because the collateral circulation
                             may not be well developed in patients without underlying peripheral vascular disease, muscle necrosis can appear
                             within 4–6 h after onset, although this time frame is highly variable. Patients are heparinized at time of diagnosis.
                             Therapy directed at the specific etiology is critical to achieve a successful outcome. Revascularization after 8–12 h
                             of ischemia usually is less effective. If the underlying source of the emboli is not adequately treated, recurrence is
                             likely and is associated with poor prognosis. The surgical approach to femoral embolectomy is a groin incision and
                             isolation of the common, superficial, and deep femoral arteries. Both the superficial and deep femoral systems are
                             explored, and small embolectomy catheters are passed into the distal lower extremity. In addition to passage of em-
                             bolectomy catheters, angioscopy may be helpful. Residual thrombus on intraop arteriogram requires distal surgical
                             exposure and exploration.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Peripheral artery embolism

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                               Position                   Supine

                               Incision                   Limited groin, medial knee, possible distal leg incisions

                               Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g iv

                               Surgical time              Variable, 1–4 h

                               Closing                    Ischemia-reperfusion syndrome with acidosis and hyperkalemia, renal tubular necrosis from
                                 considerations           myoglobinuria

                               EBL                        100–300 mL

                               Postop care                May need ICU for cardiac monitoring; monitor metabolic disturbances, neurovascular status, and
                                                          for compartment syndrome

===== PAGE 439 =====
Lumbar Sympathectomy             439

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Mortality                10–40% (~80% cardiac); older age; acute onset →↑ risk.

                     Morbidity                Arterial reocclusion or thrombosis: 20%
                                              Wound hematoma: 10–20%
                                              Recurrent emboli: 6–45% (less with anticoagulation)
                                              Amputation: 5–10%
                                              Metabolic complications: Frequent
                                              Compartment syndrome: Occasional

                     Pain score               4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                30–90 yr

                     Male:Female              3:2

                     Incidence                50/100,000 admissions

                     Etiology                 Cardiac origin (AF accounts for 50–75% of patients; less frequent, LV thrombus from MI) or non-
                                              cardiac origin (mural thrombus from thoracic or abdominal aortic pathology)

                                                                                                                                                                 Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                                    Surgery
                     Associated               Rheumatic heart disease and mitral stenosis, mitral or aortic valve prosthesis, CAD and MI, CHF,
                       conditions             endocarditis, peripheral vascular and cerebrovascular disease.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass, p. 435.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bandyk DF, Johnson BL, Kirkpatrick AF, et al. Surgical sympathectomy for reflex sympathetic dystrophic syndromes. J Vasc Surg
                        2002; 35:269–77
                     2. Beglaibter N, Berlatzky Y, Zamir O, et al. Retroperitoneoscopic lumbar sympathectomy. J Vasc Surg 2002; 35:815–7.
                     3. Gassage JA, Ali T, Chambers J, et al: Peripheral arterial embolism: prevalence, outcome, and the role of echocardiography in
                        management. Vasc Endovascular Surg 2006; 40:280–6.
                     4. Jaffery Z, Thornton SN, White CJ: Acute limb ischemia. Am J Med Sci 2011; 342:226–34.
                     5. Setacci C, de Donato G, Setacci F, Sirignano P, Galzerano G: Hybrid procedures for acute limb ischemia. J Cardiovasc Surg
                        2012; 53:133–43.
                     6. Varty K, Johnston JA, Beets G, et al: Arterial embolectomy. A long-term perspective. J Cardiovasc Surg 1992; 33:79–84.
                     7. Zaraca F, Stringari C, Ebner JA, Ebner H: Routine versus selective use of intraoperative angiography during thromboembolectomy
                        for acute lower limb ischemia: analysis of outcomes. Ann Vasc Surg 2010; 24:621–7.

                   LUMBAR SYMPATHECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The role of open surgical or endoscopic lumbar sympathectomy is not well defined. The proce-
                   dure is used selectively in patients with causalgia, inoperable lower limb ischemia with rest pain or toe gangrene,
                   symptomatic vasospastic disorders (e.g., Raynaud’s phenomenon, frostbite), and sometimes as an adjunct to distal
                   revascularization procedures. Causalgia responds well to lumbar sympathectomy, especially if performed early in
                   the clinical course. There may be some benefit of the procedure in 50–60% of patients with rest pain or ischemic
                   ulceration. Sympathectomy may increase collateral blood flow and local skin blood flow. Scleroderma with im-
                   pending “minor” amputation may benefit from sympathectomy with improved wound healing. Sympathetic dener-
                   vation involves the division of preganglionic fibers along their segmental origins and resection of corresponding
                   relay ganglia. For most clinical indications, L2 and L3 ganglionectomy sufficiently sympathectomizes the lower
                   extremity (Fig. 6.3-9).

===== PAGE 440 =====
440    c h a p t e r 6.3    Vascular Surgery

                                                                                  Inferior vena cava
                                                                                                 Aorta

                                                                                                                     Left sympathetic chain
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                                               Right sympathetic chain

                                       Figure 6.3-9. Surgical anatomy for lumbar sympathectomy. (Reproduced with
                                       permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition.
                                       Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                             The anterolateral retroperitoneal approach is the most commonly performed open surgical technique because of
                             the adequate exposure and a relatively well tolerated incision. For this approach, an oblique incision is made through
                             the abdominal musculature, extending from the lateral border of the rectus abdominus to the anterior axillary line.
                             Cephalad and caudad blunt dissection is performed between the transversalis fascia and peritoneum. The dissection
                             is continued in a retroperitoneal fashion. The psoas muscle is identified, with care being taken to leave the ureter and
                             gonadal vessels attached to overlying peritoneum. The sympathetic chain is identified between the psoas muscle and
                             the vertebra (medial to psoas and overlying the transverse process of lumbar vertebra). On the left side, the sympa-
                             thetic chain is lateral to the abdominal aorta; on the right, the sympathetic chain is beneath the IVC. The sympathetic
                             chain is dissected free from surrounding tissue, clipped proximally and distally, and resected. Hemostasis is achieved,
                             and the abdominal wall is closed in layers.
                             A posterior approach is used less often because of significant postop paraspinous muscle spasms. In this approach,
                             a transverse lumbar incision is made, and the paraspinous muscles are partially divided and retracted to expose the
                             vertebra. The sympathetic chain is identified and resected as described. The anterior/transperitoneal approach is
                             performed in conjunction with an abdominal aortic or intraperitoneal procedure. Dissection is carried to the psoas
                             muscle; the retroperitoneum is entered, and the sympathetic chain is isolated in the groove between the psoas and
                             the vertebra. The sympathetic chain is clipped proximally and distally and resected.

===== PAGE 441 =====
Lumbar Sympathectomy       441

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Causalgia; inoperable arterial occlusive disease with limb-threatening ischemia causing
                   rest pain, ulceration, or superficial digital gangrene; symptomatic vasospastic disorders (e.g., Raynaud’s phenomenon
                   or frostbite)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Anterolateral (Flowthow)                         Posterior (Royle)       Anterior (Adson)

                     Position                Supine (flank slightly raised); widen dis-       Prone                   Supine
                                             tance between costal margin and iliac
                                             crest.

                     Incision                Oblique (lateral edge of rectus to ribs at       Posterior transverse    Transverse or midline
                                             anterior axillary line)                          over midlumbar          abdominal
                                                                                              region

                     Special                 Self-retaining retractor                         ⇐                       ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  May use frozen section to confirm                ⇐                       ⇐
                       considerations        specimen.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1g iv                                  ⇐                       ⇐

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                     Surgical time           2–3 h                                            3h                      4h

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                     Closing                 Flex table to facilitate abdominal wall clo-     ⇐                       ⇐
                       considerations        sure; occasionally drain is placed.

                     EBL                     50–100 mL (unless complicated)                   50–100 mL               ⇐

                     Postop care             PACU → ward. (May require cardiac                ⇐                       ⇐
                                             and hemodynamic monitoring in high-
                                             risk patients, or if combined with distal
                                             revascularization.)

                     Mortality               Minimal                                          ⇐                       ⇐

                     Morbidity               Postsympathectomy neuralgia: 50%                 ~50%                    ⇐
                                             Sexual derangement—retrograde ejacula-           ~25–50%                 ⇐
                                             tion (usually bilateral L1 sympathectomy):                               ⇐
                                             25–50%                                                                   ⇐
                                             Wound hematoma: 10%                              ~10%
                                             Wound infection: 1–3%                            ~1–3%
                                                                                              Paraspinous muscle
                                                                                              spasms

                     Pain score              5                                                5                       5 (related to primary
                                                                                                                      procedure)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                   38–91 yr; younger patients with vasospastic disease; older patients with PVD

                     Male:Female                 2:1

                     Incidence                   Unknown. Approximately 30 cases/yr at Stanford University Medical Center, mainly for inoper-
                                                 able lower extremity ischemia or as an adjunct to revascularization procedures.

                     Etiology                    PVD (rest pain and tissue loss);vasospastic disorders; causalgia

                     Associated conditions       PVD (rare); vasospastic disorders (rare)

===== PAGE 442 =====
442    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             See Anesthetic Considerations following Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass, p. 435.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Bandyk DF, Johnson BL, Kirkpatrick AF, et al: Surgical sympathectomy for reflex sympathetic dystrophic syndromes. J Vasc
                                   Surg 2002; 35:269–77
                                2. Beglaibter N, Berlatzky Y, Zamir O, et al: Retroperitoneoscopic lumbar sympathectomy. J Vasc Surg 2002; 35:815–7.
                                3. Nemes R, Surlin V, Chiutu L, Georgescu M, Georgescu I: Retroperitoneoscopic lumbar sympathectomy: prospective study
                                   upon a series of 50 consecutive patients. Surg Endosc 2011; 25(9):3066–70.
                                4. Repelaer van Driel OJ, van Bockel JH, van Schilfgaarde R: Lumbar sympathectomy for severe lower limb ischaemia: results
                                   and analysis of factors influencing the outcome. J Cardiovasc Surg 1988; 29(3):310–14.
                                5. Sanni A, Hamid A, Dunning J: Is sympathectomy of benefit in critical left ischaemia not amenable to revascularization?
                                   Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2005; 4:478–83.
                                6. Setaccia C, de Donatoa G, Teraa M, et al: Chapter IV: Treatment of critical limb ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2011;
                                   42(S2):S43–59.
                                7. Watarida S, Shiraishi S, Fujimura M, et al: Laparoscopic lumbar sympathectomy for lower-limb disease. Surg Endosc 2002;
                                   16:500–3.
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                             VENOUS SURGERY—THROMBECTOMY
                             OR VEIN EXCISION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Standard therapy for acute DVT consists of anticoagulation, bed rest, and elevation of the
                             extremity. Endovascular or catheter-directed thrombolysis and thrombectomy systems have been shown to
                             extract large venous thrombus burden. Open surgical thrombectomy for acute iliofemoral DVT remains contro-
                             versial. Venous thrombectomy is recommended for patients with threatened limb loss or venous gangrene caused
                             by massive DVT associated with high compartment pressures and arterial insufficiency (phlegmasia cerulea do-
                             lens). Surgical venous thrombectomy requires exposure of the femoral vein via a groin cut-down. The common
                             femoral vein is isolated (located medial or posteromedial to the femoral artery) and controlled proximally and
                             distally. The patient is given iv heparin at this stage, if not already heparinized. A transverse venotomy is followed
                             by extraction of the thrombus, using forceps and Fogarty embolectomy catheters (Fig. 6.3-10). Distal thrombi are
                             expressed through the same incision with the aid of an Esmarch bandage placed on the extremity. After complete
                             removal of the thrombus, the venotomy is closed with nonabsorbable sutures, and flow through the femoral vein is
                             reestablished. The femoral incision is closed in layers. A plastic/Silastic drain may or may not be used. The best re-
                             sults of thrombectomy are obtained in young patients with the first episode of proximal (iliofemoral) thrombosis.
                             Nonsuppurative thrombophlebitis of the superficial veins may develop due to local trauma, prolonged inactivity,
                             fungal infection, or the use of oral contraceptives. Suppurative thrombophlebitis may occur as a complication of iv
                             line placement or iv drug abuse. Underlying varicose veins may predispose to thrombophlebitis. Migratory superfi-
                             cial thrombophlebitis may be associated with chronic ischemia of the extremities in Buerger’s disease, or it may de-
                             velop in patients with a malignancy. Conservative management with hot compresses, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
                             medications, and elevation of the extremity is effective in most cases. Rarely, excision of the acutely thrombosed
                              greater saphenous vein is indicated to prevent progression of thrombosis to the saphenofemoral junction and into the
                              deep venous system. Vein excision is simply approached by a longitudinal incision directly over the affected vein. The
                              phlebitic vein is dissected from the surrounding tissue, ligated proximally and distally, and removed. The surrounding
                              fibrotic tissue is debrided gently. The wound is irrigated and packed open with moist gauze. Suppurative phlebitis is
                              treated with iv antibiotics and complete excision of the involved vein segment through multiple small incisions.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Lower-limb venous thrombosis threatening viability; femoral thrombosis < 10 d;
                             iliac thrombosis < 3 wk; floating thrombi at hip level; acute deep or superficial venous thrombosis; suppurative
                             thrombophlebitis.

===== PAGE 443 =====
Venous Surgery—Thrombectomy or Vein Excision              443

                                                                                                                                                           Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                                Figure 6.3-10. Fogarty catheter embolectomy with catheter insertion in the distal
                                vessel. (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery,
                                Vol 2. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Thrombectomy                                         Vein Excision

                     Position               Supine                                               ⇐

                     Incision               Ipsilateral longitudinal or oblique groin incision   Multiple small incisions along the course of
                                                                                                 vein to be excised

                     Special                Fogarty embolectomy catheters; RBC salvage           None
                       instrumentation      System

                     Unique                 IPPV during thrombectomy may decrease                None
                       considerations       chance of PE 2° ↓ venous return → more com-
                                            plete extraction of the thrombus.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv. If the patient has septic          Dependent on culture of aspirate. Usually a
                                            thrombus, antibiotic is dependent on blood           septic patient is on broad-spectrum antibiotics
                                            culture.                                             (guided by culture).

                     Surgical time          2–3 h                                                1–3 h

                     Closing                None                                                 Wound packed open for drainage
                       considerations

                     EBL                    50–250 mL                                            ⇐

                     Postop care            PACU → ward; ICU in high-risk patients; hepa-        PACU → ward; support stockings
                                            rin administered before and after procedure,
                                            followed by Coumadin for 1–6 mo.

                     Mortality              Minimal (depending on underlying illness)            Minimal

===== PAGE 444 =====
444    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                        Thrombectomy                                       Vein Excision

                               Morbidity                Postthrombotic syndrome: < 10–44%                  Minimal
                                                        Venous stasis
                                                        Nonpitting edema
                                                        Brawny induration
                                                        Aching pain

                               Pain score               3                                                  2

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                Young adult—elderly

                               Male:Female              1:2

                               Incidence                6–7 million in the United States have adverse effects from chronic venous stasis; 500,000 have
                                                        complications of leg ulceration.

                               Etiology                 Chronic primary varicose veins; defective venous valves; impaired pumping action of muscles in
                                                        leg; previous iliofemoral thrombophlebitis; obstruction of venous return
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                               Associated               Multifactorial: varicose veins; underlying malignancy; altered coagulation status (hypercoagulabil-
                                 conditions             ity, acquired or congenital); Hx of DVT/thrombophlebitis

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             See Anesthetic Considerations following Infrainguinal Arterial Bypass, p. 435.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Bluckians A, Meier GH III: Treatment of symptomatic lower extremity acute deep venous thrombosis: role of mechanical
                                   thrombectomy. Vascular 2007; 15:297–303.
                                2. Comerota AJ: The current role of operative venous thrombectomy in deep vein thrombosis. Semin Vasc Surg 2012; 25:2–12.
                                3. Davenport DL, Xenos ES: Early outcomes and risk factors in venous thrombectomy: an analysis of the American College of
                                   Surgeons NSQIP dataset. Vasc Endovascular Surg 2011; 45:325–8.
                                4. Kim HS, Patra A, Paxton BE, et al: Catheter-directed thrombolysis with percutaneous rheolytic thrombectomy versus
                                   thrombolysis along in upper and lower extremity deep vein thrombosis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2006; 29:1003–7.
                                5. Vedantham S, Vesely TM, Parti N, et al: Lower extremity venous thrombolysis with adjunctive mechanical thrombectomy.
                                   J Vasc Interv Radiol 2002; 13:1001–8.
                                6. Wakefield TW: Treatment options for venous thrombosis. J Vasc Surg 2000; 31:613–20.
                                7. Wissgott C, Kamusella P, Andresen R: Percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy: advantages and limitations. J Cardiovasc
                                   Surg 2011; 52(4):477–84.

                             SURGERY FOR PORTAL HYPERTENSION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Alcoholic liver disease is the major cause of portal HTN, and end-stage liver disease (ESLD) with cir-
                             rhosis is the 10th leading cause of death in the United States (exceeding 23,000/yr). Of patients with portal HTN, 15–
                             20% have variceal hemorrhage during the first yr of diagnosis (additional 5–10 % incidence of bleeding per yr); and
                             the initial episode of variceal hemorrhage is associated with 50% mortality. Portal HTN (> 15 mm Hg) develops when
                             splanchnic venous flow to the right heart becomes impeded. Medical and surgical therapeutic interventions are di-
                             rected not at portal HTN per se, but at its complications—notably bleeding esophageal varices. Intractable ascites
                             and hypersplenism are less common indications for operative therapy. Presinusoidal portal HTN, unlike sinusoidal

===== PAGE 445 =====
Surgery for Portal Hypertension    445

                                                                   Spleen                                                      Spleen

                                      Liver                                                     Liver

                                                     SV                                                           SV
                                              PV                                                        PV
                              IVC                                                       IVC
                                                       RV                                                           RV

                                                               Kidney                                                      Kidney

                                  A. End-to-side portacaval shunt                         B. Side-to-side portacaval shunt

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                                                   Spleen                                                      Spleen

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                      Liver                                                   Liver

                                                     SV                                                           SV
                               PV                                                       PV
                              IVC                      RV                               IVC

                                                               Kidney                                                      Kidney
                                                                                                                   RV

                                        C. Mesocaval shunt                                       D. Splenorenal shunt

                               Figure 6.3-11. Types of shunts: A. End-to-side portacaval; B. side-to-side portacaval;
                               C. mesocaval shunt; D. distal splenorenal. (Reproduced with permission from Hardy
                               JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)

                   or postsinusoidal obstruction, is not associated with severe hepatocellular disease; thus, the prognosis for patients
                   with presinusoidal block is better than for those with sinusoidal or postsinusoidal disease. Surgical approaches can be
                   divided into shunt and nonshunt procedures. Shunt procedures can be classified as either total (decompression of
                   the portal venous system) or selective (decompression of only the varix-bearing area). It should be noted, however,
                   that surgery for portal HTN has been replaced largely by the TIPS procedure (see p. 1507).

                   SHUNT PROCEDURES
                   There are two general types of total shunt (portosystemic shunt) procedures. The end-to-side portacaval shunt
                   (Fig. 6.3-11A) is technically simpler and may be more appropriate in emergency situations. It is associated with im-
                   mediate control of hemorrhage in the majority of cases. The portacaval shunt, however, does eliminate portal perfu-
                   sion of the liver and does not decompress the hepatic sinusoids. Alternatively, the functional side-to-side shunt
                   (Fig. 6.3-11B) allows decompression of hepatic sinusoids and may preserve some degree of portal perfusion of the
                   liver. Also, it is more effective in controlling ascites. Variations of the side-to-side shunt include portacaval, spleno-
                   renal, mesocaval (Clatworthy), and portarenal (rarely used).

===== PAGE 446 =====
446    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                             For the end-to-side and side-to-side portacaval shunts, the approach is via an extended right subcostal incision.
                             Cholecystectomy usually is not performed because of the likelihood of profuse bleeding from the liver bed. The
                             hepatoduodenal ligament is identified, and the portal vein is exposed from the hilum of the liver to the pancreas.
                             The gastroduodenal and right gastric branches may be divided to provide additional exposure of the portal vein.
                             The IVC is exposed by incising the peritoneum just beneath the hepatic triad. Proximal and distal control of the
                             portal vein is achieved, and a side-biting clamp is placed on the IVC. To perform an end-to-side portacaval shunt,
                             the portal vein is divided and oversewn proximally; the end-to-side anastomosis is performed from the portal vein
                             to the IVC. The alternative is to perform a side-to-side anastomosis of the portal vein to the IVC without division
                             of the portal vein.
                             The proximal splenorenal shunt is approached through a left thoracoabdominal or transabdominal incision.
                             The spleen is isolated and removed, and the distal splenic vein is mobilized from the distal pancreatic bed. The
                             left renal vein is exposed and controlled. The distal splenic vein is then anastomosed in an end-to-side fashion to
                             the midrenal vein. The mesocaval shunt (Fig. 6.3-11C) is indicated in cases of ascites, periportal fibrosis, portal
                             vein thrombosis, and Budd-Chiari syndrome. The mesocaval shunt is approached through a vertical midline
                             incision. The colon is retracted cephalad, and the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) is identified at the root of the
                             mesentery. A length of the SMV is isolated and encircled. A Kocher maneuver (mobilization of the duodenum)
                             is performed, and the IVC is exposed anteriorly and laterally. A side-biting clamp partially occludes the IVC,
                             and a 14- to 20-mm Dacron graft is anastomosed in an end-to-side fashion to the IVC. The graft is clamped and
                             the side-biting clamp removed from the IVC, thereby restoring flow via the IVC. The SMV is clamped, and an
                             end-to-side anastomosis is created from the graft to the SMV. Flow is, thus, reestablished from the SMV through
     Cardiovascular

                             the graft to the IVC.
        Surgery

                             Selective shunts are designed to decompress esophageal varices, while some portal perfusion of the liver is main-
                             tained. The hallmark example of this approach is the distal splenorenal shunt (Warren; Fig. 6.3-11D), which is
                             seldom used in emergency situations. The principal feature of this shunt is disconnection of the splenic and superior
                             mesenteric venous drainage systems. The distal splenorenal shunt is approached through a left chevron or extended
                             left subcostal incision. The lesser sac is entered after division of the gastroepiploic vessels and mobilization of the
                             splenic flexure of the colon. The stomach is retracted cephalad, and the peritoneum overlying the inferior aspect of
                             the pancreas is incised. The splenic vein is identified and controlled proximally and distally. The inferior mesenteric
                             vein is divided. The splenic vein is divided proximally, and the proximal stump is oversewn. Then the splenic vein is
                             mobilized from the pancreatic bed. The left renal vein is identified, and 5–7 cm of the vein is isolated. The splenic
                             vein is anastomosed in an end-to-side fashion to the renal vein. The coronary vein is ligated close to its origin. The
                             distal splenorenal shunt decompresses the stomach, distal esophagus, and spleen and controls variceal hemorrhage
                             in 85% of patients.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: Total shunt (e.g., portacaval, proximal splenorenal, mesocaval); selective
                             shunt (e.g., Warren); nonshunt procedures (e.g., Sugiura, Hassab, and esophageal transection with stapling)
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Bleeding esophageal varices (as a result of portal HTN); ascites; hypersplenism

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (TOTAL AND SELECTIVE SHUNTS)
                                                                              Proximal                 Mesocaval             Distal Splenorenal
                                                      Portacaval              Splenorenal              (Clatworthy)          (Warren)

                               Position               Supine                  Supine ± left flank      Supine                Supine, left side el-
                                                                              elevated                                       evated slightly

                               Incision               Extended right          Left thoracoabdomi-      Vertical midline      Left chevron or left
                                                      subcostal—may           nal or left subcostal,   abdominal             subcostal with mid-
                                                      be lengthened or        or vertical midline                            line extension
                                                      converted to left
                                                      thoracoabdominal.

                               Special                Self-retaining          ⇐                        ⇐                     ⇐
                                 instrumentation      retractor

                               Unique                 May need FFP; con-      ⇐                        ⇐                     ⇐
                                 considerations       sider Cell Saver.

===== PAGE 447 =====
Surgery for Portal Hypertension              447

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (TOTAL AND SELECTIVE SHUNTS) (cont’d)
                                                                                    Proximal                        Mesocaval                      Distal Splenorenal
                                                    Portacaval                      Splenorenal                     (Clatworthy)                   (Warren)

                     Antibiotics                    Cefazolin 1 g iv                ⇐                               ⇐                              ⇐

                     Surgical time                  4–6 h                           ⇐                               ⇐                              ⇐

                     Closing                        None                            ⇐                               ⇐                              ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                            1000–2000 mL                    ⇐                               ⇐                              ⇐

                     Postop care                    Patient → ICU; care-            ⇐                               ⇐                              ⇐
                                                    ful fluid management;
                                                    consider Na+ restric-
                                                    tion; may require PA
                                                    catheter.

                     Mortality                      Emergency: 38%                  5–10%                           ⇐                              1–16%
                                                    Elective: 3%
                                                    Child’s A: 0–15%*

                                                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                                    Child’s B: 1–43%*

                                                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                                    Child’s C: 6–58%*

                     Morbidity                      Late liver failure: 50%         ~50%                            ⇐                              —
                                                    Encephalopathy: 32%             ~32%                            ⇐                              5–47% (overall)
                                                    Child’s A: 8%*                                                                                 5% at 2 yr
                                                    Child’s B: 20%*                                                                                12% at 3–6 yr
                                                    Child’s C: 30%*                                                                                27% at 10 yr
                                                    Early rebleeding:               ~0–19%                          ⇐                              —
                                                    0–19%                           20%                             9–30%                          —
                                                    Shunt thrombosis:                                               Duodenal obstruction;          Loss of selectivity:
                                                    1–10%                                                           erosion through bowel          60% (@ 2 yr)
                                                                                                                    wall
                                                                                                                                                   Recurrent variceal-
                                                                                                                                                   hemorrhage (shunt
                                                                                                                                                   occlusion): 3–19%
                                                                                                                                                   Portal vein thrombo-
                                                                                                                                                   sis: 4–10%

                     Pain score                     6                               6                               6                              6

                     Note: In addition to the shunt procedure itself, other factors that determine postop morbidity and mortality include severity of hepatocellular disease,
                     degree of hepatic reserve, and urgency of the procedure. Although the specific numbers may vary, several comparative series have shown no differ-
                     ence in operative mortality rate or long-term survival rate among the various open shunt procedures.

                   NONSHUNT PROCEDURES
                   Nonshunt procedures are designed to devascularize the esophagogastric region, thus eliminating acute variceal
                   hemorrhage. Procedures of this type include portazygos disconnection; splenectomy; coronary vein ligation; and
                   transesophageal or transgastric varix ligation.
                   The Sugiura operation, approached via abdominal and thoracic incisions, includes esophageal transection and
                   devascularization, splenectomy, and pyloromyotomy. This procedure is usually performed in two operative stages,
                   sometimes with a delayed second stage. The Hassab procedure involves devascularization of the upper half of the
                   stomach and splenectomy, thus effectively disconnecting the esophageal varices. (This operation has been reserved
                   in some centers for the failures of sclerotherapy.) Finally, esophageal transection, using a stapling device, discon-
                   nects the varices in the lower esophagus. This is accomplished by placing a row of staples at the esophagus just above
                   the esophagogastric junction. Because portal perfusion of the liver is maintained after the nonshunt procedures,
                   hepatic function is preserved.

===== PAGE 448 =====
448    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF NONSHUNT PROCEDURES
                                                      Sugiura (Two Stages)               Hassab                             Esophageal Transection

                               Position               Supine, left side elevated         Supine                             ⇐

                               Incision               Abdominal stage: midline; tho-     Vertical midline                   ⇐
                                                      racic stage: left thoracotomy

                               Special                Self-retaining retractor           ⇐                                  ⇐
                                 instrumentation

                               Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv                   ⇐                                  ⇐

                               Surgical time          4–6 h for both stages              4h                                 ⇐

                               EBL                    1000–2000 mL                       ⇐                                  ⇐

                               Postop care            ICU; careful hemodynamic           ⇐                                  ⇐
                                                      monitoring; PA catheterization

                               Mortality              Overall: 5–14%                     12–38%                             10–83%
                                                      Emergent: 14% (≤ 60%)
                                                      Elective: 3%                       10%
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                               Morbidity              Recurrent hemorrhage:              7%                                 0–50%
                                                      2–50%
                                                      Esophagopleural leak: 6%           —                                  3%
                                                      Encephalopathy: 3%                 1–25%                              33%
                                                      Ascites: 2%                        4%                                 11%
                                                      Wound infection: 2%                —                                  11%

                               Pain score             6                                  5                                  5

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS for Shunt and Nonshunt Procedures
                               Age range              11–72 yr (mean age = 48 yr); depending on etiology: pediatric (e.g., congenital hepatic fibrosis)
                                                      to adult (e.g., alcoholic liver disease)

                               Male:Female            2–8:1

                               Incidence              Rare

                               Etiology               Alcoholic liver disease (alcoholic hepatitis, chronic alcoholism, cirrhosis); postnecrotic cirrhosis;
                                                      portal vein thrombosis; splenic vein occlusion; hematologic diseases; hepatic vein occlusion;
                                                      schistosomiasis; congenital hepatic fibrosis; sarcoidosis; sinusoidal occlusion (vitamin A toxicity,
                                                      Gaucher’s disease); venoocclusive disease

                               Associated             Alcohol dependency; cirrhosis/liver failure; poor nutritional status; coagulopathy; encephalopathy
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             (Procedures covered: shunt and nonshunt procedures for portal HTN surgery)

                                      PREOPERATIVE

                              Respiratory              Hypoxemia may be present 2° ascites, V/Q mismatch, ↑ R→L pulmonary shunting, atelec-
                                                       tasis, pulmonary infections and ↓ pulmonary diffusing capacity.
                                                       Tests: Consider ABG; PFTs, as indicated; CXR.

===== PAGE 449 =====
Surgery for Portal Hypertension       449

                    Cardiovascular         Patients presenting with portal HTN often have a hyperdynamic circulatory state with ↑
                                           plasma volume, ↑ CO, and ↓ SVR, with a decreased ability to ↑ SVR or ↑ HR in response
                                           to stimuli. Ventricular performance may be abnormal (CHF), especially in patients with
                                           alcoholic liver disease. Ascites →↑ intrathoracic pressure, ↓ FRC, ↓ venous return, and ↓
                                           CO. Older patients in this population usually have CAD.
                                           Tests: ECG. If LV function in question, ECHO or angiography.

                    Hepatic                The physical manifestations of hepatic disease include palmar erythema, caput medusae,
                                           spider angiomas, and gynecomastia. Albumin and other products of liver synthesis (e.g.,
                                           coagulation factors) may be decreased. Encephalopathy may be present 2° impaired am-
                                           monia metabolism.
                                           Tests: Bilirubin; albumin; PT; SGOT; SGPT; ammonia; alkaline phosphatase

                    Gastrointestinal       Portal HTN eventually → esophageal and gastric varices. Patients may present emergently
                                           with profuse GI bleeding. Ascites occurs in ~80% of patients with portal HTN, and spleno-
                                           megaly is invariably present. As a result of elevated intraabdominal pressure from ascites
                                           and slow gastric emptying, a rapid-sequence induction with full-stomach precautions will
                                           be necessary (see p. B-5).

                    Renal                  Portal HTN →↓ GFR and ↓ renal blood flow → renal failure.
                                           Tests: Consider UA; creatinine clearance as indicated from H&P.

                                                                                                                                                   Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                    Hematologic            These patients are often anemic as a result of poor nutrition, malabsorption, and intestinal
                                           tract blood loss. Hypersplenism may be present (Plt count < 50,000 and WBC < 2000).
                                           Synthesis of all coagulation factors is decreased except factor VIII and fibrinogen. A low-
                                            grade DIC may be present. T&C for 8–10 U PRBC.
                                            Tests: CBC; Plt count; PT; PTT; consider DIC screen.

                    Pharmacologic          The liver is the major site of drug biotransformation; however, the effects of hepatic dys-
                                           function on drug elimination and disposition are inconsistent.

                    Laboratory             These patients may have significant electrolyte disturbances (e.g., ↓↓ Na+, ↓ K+).
                                           Tests: Electrolytes and others as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication          If premedication is appropriate, small doses of anxiolytic, such as midazolam (0.5–1 mg iv),
                                           are preferable. Avoid im medications in patients with possible coagulopathy. Full-stomach
                                           precautions are necessary. Metoclopramide (10 mg iv) and ranitidine (50 mg iv) may be
                                           given 60 min before surgery.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Preservation of intravascular volume and myocardial stability can be a challenge in
                   these patients.

                    Induction              Instable patients rapid-sequence induction with propofol (1–2 mg/kg) and succinylcholine
                                           (1–2 mg/kg) should be used. Replace blood loss and ensure normovolemia before induc-
                                           tion (if possible). Etomidate (0.2 mg/kg) or ketamine (1 mg/kg) may be preferable for in-
                                           duction in hemodynamically unstable patients.

                    Maintenance            Combination of narcotics (fentanyl) and inhalation agents (isoflurane/sevoflurane), titrated
                                           to hemodynamic condition. Midazolam (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) often is given in conjunction with
                                           the narcotic to ensure amnesia during times of hemodynamic instability when isoflurane
                                           cannot be tolerated. N2O is avoided to prevent bowel distention. Muscle relaxation is need-
                                           ed (e.g., vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg or less, titrated using a nerve stimulator).
                                           *NB: After drainage of ascitic fluid, there may be a precipitous drop in BP requiring rapid
                                           volume replacement ± vasopressor.

                    Emergence              Generally deferred to ICU due to large fluid shifts and transfusion requirements. Patients
                                           who have undergone uneventful and nonemergent surgery may be candidates for extubation.

===== PAGE 450 =====
450    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                              Blood and fluid             Anticipate large blood loss.              FFP, Plt, and cryoprecipitate should be available to
                                 requirements             IV: 14 ga × 2 or 7 Fr × 2                 treat coagulopathy.
                                                          Rapid infuser
                                                          RBC salvage device
                                                          8–10 U PRBC
                                                          Warm all fluids.
                                                          Humidify all gases.
                                                          Warming blanket                           e. g., Bair-Hugger warmer

                              Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                                          Arterial line                             Arterial and central pressure monitoring are essen-
                                                          CVP or PA catheter                        tial. A PA catheter is useful in this setting because
                                                                                                    most patients are cirrhotic and may have excessive
                                                                                                    blood loss and large fluid shifts.
                                                          UO                                        UO is measured and is helpful as a monitor of renal
                                                                                                    perfusion. Mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg iv) may be needed
                                                                                                    to maintain UO.
                                                          Temperature                               In these procedures, prevention of hypothermia
                                                                                                    is important. In patients with large varices, avoid
                                                                                                    esophageal placement of T probes or stethoscopes.
     Cardiovascular

                                                          ABGs                                      Serial ABGs to determine adequacy of ventilation
        Surgery

                                                                                                    and normal acid base status should be done.
                                                          Hct, coags, Ca++                          Hct, coagulation, and Ca++ should be measured
                                                                                                    following replacement of large blood volumes.
                                                          Electrolytes                               Electrolytes and glucose also should be monitored.
                                                          Blood glucose                              Glucose metabolism in liver disease may be im-
                                                                                                     paired → ↓ glucose.

                              Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                          3 eyes

                              Complications               Coagulopathy
                                                          Hemorrhage
                                                          Hypothermia

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                               Complications              Coagulopathy
                                                          Hypothermia
                                                          Encephalopathy
                                                          Renal failure

                               Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)
                                 management               Parenteral opiates

                               Tests                      CXR: line placement                       DIC screen, if continued bleeding.
                                                          Hct
                                                          Electrolytes
                                                          Glucose

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Costa G, Cruz RJ Jr, Abu-Elmagd KM: Surgical shunt versus TIPS for treatment of variceal hemorrhage in the current era of
                                   liver and multivisceral transplantation. Surg Clin N Am 2010; 90:891–905.
                                2. Gusberg RJ: Selective shunts in selected older cirrhotic patients with variceal hemorrhage. Am J Surg 1993; 166(3):274–8.
                                3. Haberer JP, Schoeffler P, Couderc E, et al: Fentanyl pharmacokinetics in anesthetized patients with cirrhosis. Br J Anaesth
                                   1982; 54:1267.

===== PAGE 451 =====
Arteriovenous Access for Hemodialysis               451

                     4. Hassab MA: Nonshunt operations in portal hypertension without cirrhosis. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1970; 131(4):648–54.
                     5. Henderson JM: The distal splenoral shunt. Surg Clin North Am 1990; 70(2):405–23.
                     6. Henderson JM: Surgery versus transjugular intrahepatic portal systemic shunt in the treatment of severe variceal bleeding.
                        Clin Liver Dis 2006; 10:599–612.
                     7. Jenkins RL, Gedaly R, Pomposelli JJ, et al: Distal splenorenal shunt: role, indications, and utility in the era of liver
                        transplantation. Arch Surg 1999; 134:416–20.
                     8. Liu Y, Li Y, Ma J, et al: Modified Hassab’s operation for portal hypertension: experience with 562 cases. J Surg Res 2013; e1–e6.
                     9. Orozco H, Mercado MA, Takahashi T, et al: Elective treatment of bleeding varices with the Sugiura operation over 10 years.
                        Am J Surg 1992; 163(6):585–9.
                    10. Voros D, Polydorou A, Polymeneas G, et al: Long-term results with the modified Sugiura procedure or the management of
                        variceal bleeding: standing the test of time in the treatment of bleeding esophageal varices. World J Surg 2012; 36:659–66.

                   ARTERIOVENOUS ACCESS FOR HEMODIALYSIS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Peripheral subcutaneous arteriovenous (AV) fistula, or prosthetic graft, is the current procedure
                   of choice for patients requiring permanent hemodialysis access. The blood flow in the autogenous AV fistula increas-

                                                                                                                                                                    Cardiovascular
                   es with time, and the resulting vein wall thickening prevents venous tears and infiltration during dialysis.

                                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                   The standard AV fistula is usually constructed by anastomosing the cephalic vein to the radial artery at the wrist level
                   (Brescia-Cimino fistula; Fig. 6.3-12). Other locations include the “snuff box,” or antebrachium. Vascular access using
                   vascular substitutes or prosthetic grafts is performed when there is a lack of suitable veins in patients who have had

                               Figure 6.3-12. Brescia-Cimino fistula (side-to-end anastomosis). (Reproduced with
                               permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition.
                               Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 452 =====
452    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                                      Counter-incision
                                          terr-in
                                                ncision
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                          Figure 6.3-13. In arteriovenous hemodialysis access with prosthetic graft, the brachial
                                          artery and the median antebrachial, median basilic, and median cephalic veins are
                                          exposed via a horizontal incision below the antecubital joint crease. (Reproduced with
                                          permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition.
                                          Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                             failed-access procedures, peripheral vein sclerosis, or severe arterial disease involving the upper extremity. Forearm
                             grafts are constructed as a direct communication between the radial or ulnar artery and the antecubital or brachial
                             vein, or as a “loop” between the brachial artery and these veins (Fig. 6.3-13). Similarly, an access can be constructed
                             in the upper arm as a communication between the brachial artery above the elbow and the basilic or axillary vein
                             in a straight fashion. The polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) graft has become the mainstay for hemodialysis access in
                             patients who are not candidates for Brescia-Cimino fistula placement. These grafts are associated with a primary
                             patency rate of 50–60% at 2–3 yr.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: Loop or straight graft, using vascular substitute in forearm; upper-arm
                             straight graft
                             Usual preop diagnosis: End-stage renal failure requiring graft hemodialysis

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                          Forearm Loop or Straight
                                                          Forearm AV Fistula              Graft                          Upper-Arm Straight Graft

                               Position                   Supine, arm abducted            ⇐                              ⇐

                               Incision                   Longitudinal or transverse at   Transverse at antecubital      Transverse or longitudinal in
                                                          wrist, or “snuff box”           fossa and/or at wrist; coun-   upper arm
                                                                                          terincision in forearm

                               Special                    Arm/hand table (for arm ab-     ⇐                              ⇐
                                 instrumentation          duction); Doppler flow probe
                                                          may be used.

                               Unique                     Local anesthesia; consider      ⇐                              ⇐
                                 considerations           brachial plexus block (in-
                                                          creased incidence of hema-
                                                          toma); heparinization

                               Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g iv                ⇐                              ⇐

===== PAGE 453 =====
Permanent Vascular Access            453

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                                                                 Forearm Loop or Straight
                                              Forearm AV Fistula                 Graft                               Upper-Arm Straight Graft

                     Surgical time            1–2 h                              ⇐                                   ⇐

                     Closing                  Use of Doppler to 3 shunt          ⇐                                   ⇐
                       considerations         patency

                     EBL                      25–50 mL                           25–100 mL                           ⇐

                     Postop care              Hemodynamic monitoring for         ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              poor-risk patients; can be
                                              done as outpatient.

                     Mortality                Minimal, depending on associ-      ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              ated risk factors

                     Morbidity                Thrombosis: 20%                    8–32%                               ~8–32%
                                              Technical failure: 10–15%          ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              Arterial steal: Rare               ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              Cardiac failure: Rare              ⇐                                   ⇐

                                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                                              Infection: Rare                    10%                                 ⇐

                                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                              No venous outflow: Rare            6%                                  ~6%
                                              Seroma: Rare                       ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              Venous aneurysm: Rare              ⇐                                   ⇐
                                              Venous HTN: Rare                   ⇐                                   ⇐

                     Pain score               1                                  2                                   2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Pediatric and adult population

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Hemodialysis access is one of the most commonly performed procedures by vascular surgeons.

                     Etiology                 Glomerulonephritis; diabetes; HTN; pyelonephritis

                     Associated               Diabetes mellitus; PVD/CAD
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Permanent Vascular Access, p. 455.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Allon M, Robbin ML: Increasing arteriovenous fistulas in hemodialysis patients: problems and solutions. Kidney Int 2002;
                        62:1109–24.
                     2. Rose DA, Sonaike E, Hughes K: Hemodialysis access. Surg Clin N Am 2013; 93:997–1012.
                     3. Smith GE, Gohil R, Chetter IC: Factors affecting the patency of arteriovenous fistulas for dialysis access. J Vasc Surg 2012;
                        55:849–55.
                     4. Spergel LM, Ravani P, Asif A, et al: Autogenous arteriovenous fistula options. J Nephrol 2007; 20(3):288–98.

                   PERMANENT VASCULAR ACCESS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Silastic or plastic catheters are placed in patients who require venous access for chronic antibiotic ther-
                   apy, TPN, chemotherapy, or hemodialysis. Hickman, Broviac, and Groshong catheters are made of silicone rub-
                   ber or plastic with a cuff near the skin exit site, which (in theory) serves as a barrier to infection. Access is generally

===== PAGE 454 =====
454    c h a p t e r 6.3     Vascular Surgery

                             achieved via subclavian, IJ, or femoral vein puncture. These catheters are available in various sizes and in single- or
                             double-lumen configurations. Larger diameter (13 Fr) Hickman or Permacath DL catheters have been introduced
                             for hemodialysis. Mediport and Portacath devices have a metallic or plastic reservoir connected to the catheters
                             and are intended for complete subcutaneous implantation. These catheters are used in chronically ill patients, par-
                             ticularly those requiring chemotherapy. The implantable access ports have been associated with improved patient
                             comfort and reduced infection rates. Long-term catheter survival is limited by infection. Removal and replacement
                             of the catheter is the only way to eradicate the infection.
                             Variant procedure or approaches: Two major distinctions: Hickman/Broviac catheters (no reservoir) vs Medi-
                             port/Portacath catheters (subcutaneous with reservoir). Subclavian, IJ, or femoral vein puncture is selected, depend-
                             ing on vein status, previous operations, and patient comfort.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic antibiotic therapy; TPN; chemotherapy; end-stage renal failure

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                      Hickman/Broviac/Groshong                               Mediport/Portacath

                               Position               Supine, slight Trendelenburg                           ⇐

                               Incision               Puncture site (subclavian, IJ, or femoral vein);       Puncture site (subclavian, IJ, or femoral
                                                      subcutaneous tunnel for passage of catheter.           vein); subcutaneous pocket for port. Al-
     Cardiovascular

                                                      Alternative: cephalic or IJ vein cut-down to achieve   ternative: cephalic or IJ vein cut-down to
        Surgery

                                                      access.                                                achieve access.

                               Special                I.I. or fluoroscope                                    ⇐
                                 instrumentation

                               Unique                 Local anesthesia; may need iv sedation; monitor        ⇐
                                 considerations       for ectopy during placement.

                               Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv                                       ⇐

                               Surgical time          30–90 min                                              45–90 min

                               EBL                    10–25 mL                                               25–50 mL

                               Postop care            CXR in recovery room; may be outpatient.               ⇐

                               Mortality              Minimal                                                ⇐

                               Morbidity              Catheter thrombosis: 25%                               4%
                                                      Skin exit site infection: 13%                          —
                                                      Poor flow: 10–13%                                      ~10–13%
                                                      Catheter sepsis: 5–8%                                  2%
                                                      Arterial puncture: 6%                                  ~6%
                                                      Local bleeding: 5%                                     —
                                                      SVC thrombosis: 5%                                     ~5%
                                                      Catheter displacement: 3%                              ~3%
                                                      Subclavian thrombosis: 2%                              ~2%
                                                      Pneumothorax 1–2%                                      ~1–2%
                                                      Failed attempt: 1%                                     ~1%
                                                      Infection: 3–5/1000 cath days                          —
                                                                                                             Pocket hematoma: 2%
                                                                                                             Pocket infection: 3%
                                                                                                             Catheter leakage: 1%

                               Pain score             1                                                      2

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range              Pediatrics and adults, 8–80 yr

                               Male:Female            1:1

===== PAGE 455 =====
Permanent Vascular Access          455

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence              Depending on underlying disease

                     Etiology               Access for chemotherapy; infections; hemodialysis; chronic TPN

                     Associated             Malignancy; chronic illness/infection; renal failure
                       conditions

                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR VASCULAR ACCESS
                   (Procedures covered: arteriovenous access for hemodialysis; permanent vascular access)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The patient populations presenting for vascular access surgery are extremely diverse. Patients requiring vascular ac-
                   cess for chemotherapy, TPN, and chronic antibiotic therapy frequently can be done with MAC (p. B-5). Also present-
                   ing for these procedures are end-stage renal failure patients who need arteriovenous access for hemodialysis (gener-
                   ally involving the upper extremity). These patients return to the OR frequently for revising or replacing of fistulas.
                   They are often ASA III and IV patients who may require GA or an upper extremity block. Anesthetic considerations
                   for the chronic renal failure patient are discussed below.

                                                                                                                                                         Cardiovascular
                                             Pulmonary edema may be present from fluid overload. CHF and uremic pleuritis can

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                    Respiratory
                                             occur. Pneumonia occurs more frequently in these patients due to depressed immune sys-
                                             tems. Hemodialysis contributes to hypoxemia due to V/Q mismatch and hypoventilation.
                                             Tests: CXR; consider ABG.

                    Cardiovascular           Often have HTN related to hypervolemia and a disorder of the renin-angiotensin system.
                                             May have LVH 2° to HTN. Cardiomyopathy, pericarditis, and pericardial effusion occur
                                             with uremia. Hypervolemia and hypoalbuminemia can contribute to CHF. Uremic patients
                                             often have defective aortic and carotid body reflex arcs. Ejection murmurs are common.
                                             Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                    Renal                    A comprehensive preop evaluation should include an assessment of renal function and
                                             adequacy of recent dialysis therapy. Ascertaining the patient’s usual and recent weights is
                                             useful. Dialysis is usually advisable shortly before anesthesia and surgery. The symptoms
                                             of uremia (Plt dysfunction, electrolyte/fluid abnormalities, CNS, and GI disturbances) im-
                                             prove with dialysis. If a transfusion is needed, it is best done during dialysis so intravascular
                                             volume can be controlled.
                                             Tests: Serum BUN; Cr. If patient produces urine, consider creatinine clearance, UA.

                    Hematologic              Chronic anemia with Hct ranging from 15–21 g/dL. Normochromic, normocytic anemia
                                             present 2° bone marrow depression, lack of erythropoietin, nutritional deficiency, and
                                             diminished red-cell survival time. Patients adjust to chronic anemia through ↑CO and
                                             ↑ 2,3-DPG levels. Accumulation of waste products inhibits Plt function. Defects do occur
                                             in the coagulation cascade, but PT and PTT are usually normal.
                                             Tests: CBC; Plt; PT; PTT

                    Gastrointestinal         Uremic patients commonly have hiccups, anorexia, N/V, and diarrhea. They are very prone
                                             to developing GI bleeds. Renal failure causes ↓ gastric emptying. Premedication with
                                             metoclopramide (10 mg po) and ranitidine (150 mg po) will ↓ gastric volume and pH.

                    Nervous system           CNS Sx of uremia range from malaise to Sz to coma. Fatigue and intellectual impairment
                                             commonly occur. Peripheral and autonomic neuropathies exist. Peripheral neuropathy
                                             presents as itching and paresthesia of the lower extremities. Autonomic dysfunction can
                                             cause postural ↓ BP. Document deficits carefully.

                    Endocrine                Diabetes frequently may be the cause of renal failure, with its attendant problems.
                                             Tests: Glucose

                    Immune system            Often impaired. Patients prone to sepsis. Hepatitis and HIV infections from blood prod-
                                             ucts may exist.

===== PAGE 456 =====
456    c h a p t e r 6.3    Vascular Surgery

                              Metabolic and           Accumulation of K+ urea, parathyroid hormone (hypercalcemia), Mg, aluminum (neuro-
                                biochemical           toxicity), acid metabolites, and phosphate occurs. Knowing hyperkalemia exists is of im-
                                                      portance because of the potential for fatal cardiac dysrhythmias. Shift of the oxyhemoglo-
                                                      bin curve to the right occurs due to the metabolic acidosis and ↑ 2,3-DPG (improves tissue
                                                      oxygenation). Hyponatremia is a common electrolyte disturbance in chronic renal failure.

                              Premedication           If warranted, it is best to use light premedication with sedatives or opioids due to the pos-
                                                      sibility of exaggerated effects (p. B-1).

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GA, upper extremity block, or MAC.
                             Regional anesthesia: May be advantageous due to decreased number of drug effects. See section on upper extrem-
                             ity blocks (Anesthetic Considerations for Wrist Procedures, p. 936). If the patient was very recently dialyzed, there
                             may be a residual heparin effect. Regional anesthesia is contraindicated if coagulopathy is present.
                             General anesthesia: The duration of action and elimination of many anesthetic drugs is altered in the patient with
                             renal failure.
     Cardiovascular

                              Induction               If general anesthesia is indicated, preferably LMA is used. Induction with propofol and
        Surgery

                                                      low-dose fentanyl (25–50 mcg) is usually well tolerated. In case of the need for intubation,
                                                      succinylcholine is indicated if K+ < 5.5 mEq/L. If succinylcholine is contraindicated, cisa-
                                                      tracurium (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) is the alternative muscle relaxant of choice because its elimina-
                                                      tion is not affected by renal failure. Etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg) is preferred in case of preop
                                                      hemodynamic instability.

                              Maintenance             Inhalation anesthetics (isoflurane, sevoflurane) offer the advantage of not requiring renal
                                                      elimination. Biotransformation may produce some inorganic fluoride (nephrotoxin); how-
                                                      ever, this is not an issue in dialysis patients. Opioids can produce an increased magnitude
                                                      and duration of effect. Increased accumulation of morphine glucuronides → prolonged
                                                      respiratory depression. Fentanyl and remifentanil are good choices, 2° rapid tissue redis-
                                                      tribution (fentanyl) or rapid metabolism (remifentanil). Benzodiazepine dosage should be
                                                      adjusted because protein binding in renal insufficiency/failure is reduced.

                              Emergence               Prolonged effect of anticholinesterases (e.g., neostigmine and edrophonium) effectively
                                                      offsets prolongation of blockade. Other factors affecting reversal of nondepolarizers should
                                                      be taken into account. These include acid–base status, depth of blockade, temperature, and
                                                      use of drugs such as diuretics or antibiotics, which can potentiate blockade.

                              Blood and fluid         IV: 18–20 ga × 1                        IV access may be difficult; avoid iv placement in
                                 requirements         NS @ 1–2 mL/kg/h                        operated arm. Minimize fluids in renal-failure
                                                                                              patients.

                              Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Avoid BP cuff placement on operated arm.

                              Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                      3 eyes

                              Complications           Local anesthetic toxicity

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications           Nerve damage                            These are rare complications of brachial plexus
                                                      Hematoma                                blocks.

                              Pain                    PO analgesics
                                management

===== PAGE 457 =====
Venous Surgery—Vein Stripping and Perforator Ligation               457

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bour ES, Weaver AS, Yang HC, et al: Experience with the double lumen Silastic catheter for hemoaccess. Surg Gynecol Obstet
                        1990; 171(1): 33–9.
                     2. Heberlein W: Principles of tunneled cuffed catheter placement. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol 2011; 14(4):192–7.
                     3. Monk J: Hemodialysis catheters and ports. Semin Nephrol 2002; 22:211–20.
                     4. Vasquez MA: Vascular access for dialysis: recent lessons and new insights. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2009; 18:116–21.

                   VENOUS SURGERY—VEIN STRIPPING AND
                   PERFORATOR LIGATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Chronic venous insufficiency results from static blood flow in the deep, superficial, and perforating
                   veins of the lower extremities. Clinical manifestations include pathologic changes in the skin and subcutaneous

                                                                                                                                                             Cardiovascular
                   tissues, such as pigmentation, dermatitis, induration, and ulceration around the lower portion of the leg. The con-

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                   dition is most commonly caused by defective venous valves and less often by obstruction to the venous return or
                   impaired pumping action of the muscles in the leg. The disorder is sometimes the residual of previous iliofemoral
                   thrombophlebitis. Varicose veins of the primary type, particularly those of long duration, are a common cause of
                   chronic venous insufficiency of milder degrees. Most symptoms respond well to conservative management, which
                   includes compression stockings, elevation of the extremity, and topical treatment of ulcerations. Failure of medical
                   management is an indication for surgical intervention. Split-thickness skin grafting is indicated for large ulcers to
                   accelerate healing and shorten hospitalization time. Ligation of perforators is best performed when the ulcer has
                   completely healed. The classic approach of Linton is rarely used today. If the quality of the skin overlying the perfora-
                   tors prevents a direct approach, subfascial ligation of the perforators may be performed through a short, posterior
                   midline incision. The incompetent greater or lesser saphenous veins are resected only if patency of the deep system is
                   confirmed. Venous ulcers recur in 30% of patients after surgical therapy, and ulcerations persist for prolonged period
                   in 15% of patients. Adjunctive procedures include valvuloplasty, vein transposition, and venous valve transplant.
                   Alternative procedures: Minimally invasive radiofrequency techniques have been used successfully for ablation
                   of varicose veins.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Chronic deep venous insufficiency

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Vein stripping: longitudinal or oblique groin incision and transverse incision at medial malleolus;
                                              transverse incision over posterior lower leg for lesser saphenous vein stripping.
                                              Perforator ligation: longitudinal incision along medial aspect of tibia to posterior medial
                                              malleolus

                     Special                  Vein stripper
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics              If patient has an associated venous ulcer, preop antibiotics should be based on culture results;
                                              generally, cefazolin 1 g iv, if culture results are not available.

                     Surgical time            3h

                     EBL                      50–250 mL

                     Postop care              PACU → ward; antiembolism stockings and SCDs

                     Mortality                Minimal

===== PAGE 458 =====
458    c h a p t e r 6.3      Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                               Morbidity                Persistence of nonhealing ulcer: 20–53%

                               Pain score               3

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               Age range                Young adult–elderly (generally older adults, although present in younger patients as well)

                               Male:Female              1:2

                               Incidence                6–7 million people in the United States have adverse effects from chronic venous stasis;5
                                                        500,000 have complications of leg ulceration.

                               Etiology                 Chronic primary varicose veins; defective venous valves; impaired pumping action of muscles in
                                                        leg; previous iliofemoral thrombophlebitis; obstruction of venous return

                               Associated               Varicose veins; Hx of DVT/thrombophlebitis
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                             See Anesthetic Considerations following Varicose Vein Stripping, p. 460.

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Roth SM: Endovenous radiofrequency ablation of superficial and perforator veins. Surg Clin North Am 2007; 87(5):1267–84.
                                2. See Suggested Readings for Venous Surgery—Thrombectomy or Vein Excision, p. 444.

                             VARICOSE VEIN STRIPPING AND ABLATION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: In patients with primary varicose veins, no definite cause has been identified, although age, female
                             sex, pregnancy, obesity, and positive family Hx are predisposing factors. The causes of secondary varicosity include
                             incompetence or obstruction of the deep veins as a result of previous DVT, tumor, trauma, or congenital or acquired
                             arteriovenous fistulas. Usual indications for operative therapy include aching, swelling, heaviness, cramps, itching,
                             cosmesis, stasis dermatitis, pigmentation, burning, and ulcers. Surgical treatment is contraindicated in: pregnant
                             patients; elderly patients who are considered high risk; and patients with arterial insufficiency of the lower extremi-
                             ties, lymphedema, skin infection, or coagulopathy. Endovenous thermal (laser/RF) ablation techniques have largely
                             replaced the surgical treatment of varicose veins in the lower leg. These endovenous procedures are usually per-
                              formed under local anesthesia.
                             There are two principal approaches: the stab avulsion technique and high ligation and stripping. With stab avul-
                             sion, the varicosities are marked preop. Small transverse or longitudinal incisions are made directly over these vari-
                             cosities, which are dissected from the surrounding subcutaneous tissue (with undermining of the skin) and bluntly
                             removed or avulsed. Firm pressure over the region being operated on will achieve hemostasis. After removal of all
                             marked varicosities, sterile dressings are placed and a compression bandage wrapped around the affected leg. The
                             patient is instructed to keep the leg elevated as much as possible while convalescing at home. The chief advantage of
                             the stab avulsion technique is preservation of the saphenous vein when it is not directly involved with varicosities.
                             If there is valvular incompetence of the saphenous vein, the treatment of choice is stripping (avulsion) of the incom-
                             petent portion of the greater and lesser saphenous veins, together with avulsion of the superficial varicose veins of
                             the thigh and calf. High ligation and stripping refers to the removal of the greater saphenous vein from the level of
                             medial malleolus to the saphenofemoral junction. A small transverse incision is made at the level of the ankle and the

===== PAGE 459 =====
Varicose Vein Stripping and Ablation        459

                   saphenous vein is dissected free. A longitudinal or oblique incision at the groin permits isolation of the saphenous
                   vein at the saphenofemoral junction. The greater saphenous vein is ligated proximally and distally. After a venotomy,
                   a plastic or metallic vein stripper is passed and the vein is removed or stripped in a distal-to-proximal fashion. Sterile
                   dressings are applied, followed by a compressive dressing.
                   Although high ligation and stripping is the gold standard in the treatment of varicose veins, it has largely been re-
                   placed by thermal ablation in the United States. The use of either RF or laser ablation, which results in closure and
                   often reabsorption of the vein, is highly successful and causes less postop discomfort. However, surgical ligation and
                   stripping still has a role in the management of varicose veins. If all varicose veins are removed and the incompetent
                   segment of the saphenous vein is stripped, 85% of the patients will have good-to-excellent results at late follow-up.
                   These procedures can be performed with regional or GA.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Varicose veins; symptoms of venous insufficiency; cosmetic considerations

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Stab Avulsion Technique                         High Ligation and Stripping

                     Position                Supine                                          ⇐

                     Incision                Varicosities marked preop; short stab inci-     Varicosities marked preop; small transverse
                                             sions made and veins avulsed with small         incision over saphenous vein proximal to

                                                                                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                             forceps.                                        medial malleolus; proximal saphenous vein

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                                                                             exposed via groin incisions and stripper
                                                                                             passed.

                     Special                 None                                            Vein stripper
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  May be facilitated by tourniquet.               ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             None                                            ⇐

                     Surgical time           2–3 h                                           ⇐

                     Closing                 Leg compressed with elastic wrap                ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                     50–250 mL                                       50–150 mL

                     Postop care             PACU → ward; support stockings                  ⇐ + Elevate foot of bed 10°; short periods of
                                                                                             ambulation.

                     Mortality               Minimal                                         ⇐

                     Morbidity               Recurrence: < 10%                               ⇐
                                             Hematoma: Rare                                  ⇐
                                             Infection: Rare                                 ⇐
                                             Lymph fistula: Rare                             ⇐
                                             Nerve injury: Rare                              ⇐
                                             Postop DVT: Rare                                5%
                                             Femoral artery injury: Nil                      Very rare

                     Pain score              2                                               2

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Wide range, young adult–elderly (average = 48 yr)

                     Male:Female             1:3

                     Incidence               24,000 in the United States.

===== PAGE 460 =====
460    c h a p t e r 6.3    Vascular Surgery

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                               Etiology               Primary varicose veins: no definite cause (Predisposing factors include age, female sex, preg-
                                                      nancy, obesity, and positive family Hx.)
                                                      Secondary varicose veins: incompetence or obstruction of the deep veins from DVT, tumor,
                                                      trauma, or high venous pressures due to congenital or acquired arteriovenous fistulas

                               Associated             Older age; pregnancy; obesity; DVT; tumor; trauma
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                             (Procedures covered: vein stripping and perforator ligation; varicose vein stripping)

                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Patients presenting for varicose vein surgery are a generally healthy patient population (ASA I & II). Preop consider-
                             ations and tests, therefore, should be guided by the H&P.

                              Hematologic              If regional anesthesia planned, check patient’s coagulation status.
     Cardiovascular

                                                       Tests: Plt count; Hct
        Surgery

                              Laboratory               Tests as indicated from H&P

                              Premedication            If necessary, standard premedication (p. B-1).

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: General, regional, or local anesthesia, ± sedation, are all appropriate anesthetic tech-
                             niques. Choice depends on factors such as extent of surgery, patient physical status, and patient and surgeon
                             preference.
                             Regional anesthesia:

                              Spinal                   Single-shot vs continuous: Patient in sitting or lateral decubitus position (operative site
                                                       down) for placement of hyperbaric subarachnoid block. Doses of local anesthetic for T10-
                                                       T12 level: 0.75% bupivacaine in 8% dextrose (7–10 mg); or 0.5% tetracaine in 5% dextrose
                                                       (10–12 mg). For continuous spinal (multiorifice catheter), titrate local anesthetic to desired
                                                       surgical level (T12). Large doses of hyperbaric local anesthetic should be avoided as they
                                                       may cause postop cauda equina syndrome.

                              Epidural                 Patient in sitting or lateral decubitus position for placement of epidural catheter. After
                                                       locating the epidural space, administer a test dose (e.g., 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with
                                                       1:200,000 epinephrine) to elucidate whether the catheter is subarachnoid (rapid onset
                                                       outer block) or intravascular (↑ HR, tinnitis, etc.). Titrate local anesthetic until desired
                                                       surgical level is obtained (3–5 mL at a time) usually < 15 mL.

                              Local                    Requires gentle surgical technique. Surgical field block, plus ilioinguinal and iliohypo-
                                                       gastric nerve blocks using 0.5% bupivacaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine. Usually done by
                                                       surgeon.

                             General anesthesia:

                              Induction                LMA/mask vs ETT: Standard induction (p. B-2). LMA or mask GA may be suitable for
                                                       many patients.

                              Maintenance              Standard maintenance (p. B-2)

===== PAGE 461 =====
Varicose Vein Stripping and Ablation          461

                    Emergence                  No special considerations

                    Blood and fluid            Minimal blood loss
                       requirements            IV: 18 ga × 1
                                               NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Cauda equina syndrome                     The diagnosis of cauda equina syndrome (urinary
                                                                                         and fecal incontinence, paresis of lower extremi-
                                                                                         ties, perineal hypoesthesias) should be sought in
                                                                                         the postop period in patients who have received
                                                                                         large doses of intrathecal local anesthetic during
                                                                                         continuous spinal techniques. 3 patients for bowel
                                                                                         or bladder dysfunction and perineal sensory defi-

                                                                                                                                                              Cardiovascular
                                                                                         cits. If present, consider a neurology consultation

                                                                                                                                                                 Surgery
                                                                                         and continue followup of the patient’s neurologic
                                                                                         dysfunction.
                                               Urinary retention common with re-         Patients with urinary retention may require in-
                                               gional anesthesia                         termittent catheterization until urinary function
                                                                                         resumes.

                    Pain                       PO analgesics:                            Regional anesthesia should provide sufficient anal-
                      management               Acetaminophen and codeine                 gesia postop.
                                               (Tylenol #3 1–2 tab q 4–6 h)
                                               Oxycodone and acetaminophen
                                               (Percocet 1 tab q 6 h)

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Biemans AA, Kockaert M, Akkersdijk GP, et al: Comparing endovenous laser ablation, foam sclerotherapy, and conventional
                        surgery for great saphenous varicose veins. J Vasc Surg 2013; 58(3):727–34.
                     2. Brown KR, Rossi PJ: Superficial venous disease. Surg Clin N Am 2013; 93:963–82.
                     3. Hirsch SA, Dillavou E: Options in the management of varicose veins, 2008. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 2008; 49:19–26.
                     4. Leopardi D, Hoggan BL, Fitridge RA, Woodruff PW, Maddern GJ: Systematic review of treatments for various veins. Ann
                        Vasc Surg 2009; 23:264–76.
                     5. Mackenzie RK, Paisley A, Allan PL, et al: The effect of long saphenous vein stripping on quality of life. J Vasc Surg 2002;
                        35:1197–1203.
                     6. Merchant RF, DePalma RG, Kabnick LS: Endovascular obliteration of saphenous reflex: a multicenter study. J Vasc Surg 2002;
                        35:1190–6.
                     7. Mowatt-Larssen E, Shortell CK: Treatment of primary varicose veins has changed with the introduction of new techniques.
                        Semin Vasc Surg 2012; 25:18–24.
                     8. Rasmussen L, Lawaetz M, Bjoern L, Blemings A, Eklof B: Randomized clinical trial comparing endovenous laser ablation and
                        stripping of the great saphenous vein with clinical and duplex outcome after 5 years. J Vasc Surg 2013; 58:421–6.

===== PAGE 462 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      6.4 Heart/Lung
                                           Transplantation

                                           surgeons
                                           Hari R. Mallidi, MD
                                           Bruce A. Reitz, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Daryl Oakes, MD
                                           Linda E. Foppiano, MD

===== PAGE 464 =====
SURGERY FOR HEART TRANSPLANTATION
                                      SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                             Description: Although heart transplantation has been practiced since 1967, it has had its greatest expansion since
                             the early 1980s with the introduction of cyclosporine. Currently, there are approximately 150 transplant centers
                             and 2,200 heart transplant procedures performed yearly in the United States. Indications for heart transplantation
                             range from hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) in the neonate to cardiomyopathy and ischemic heart disease
                             in the adult. Recipients usually have end-stage heart disease manifested by CHF and a prognosis of less than 1-yr
                             survival. Many patients are on inotropic drugs or on some type of additional mechanical assist, such as the use of
                             an intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) or an implanted LV-assist device. Current immunosuppressive protocols con-
                             sist of a combination of a calcineurin inhibitor with prednisone and mycophenolate mofetil. Immunosuppression
                             begins either immediately preop or perioperatively and will continue throughout the life of the patient. Induction
                             immunosuppression is commenced in the operating room after protamine administration with methylprednisolone
                             500 mg iv and basiliximab or rATG in the ICU after transplantation. Current 1-yr survival averages 85% in most
                             centers with 3-yr survival of approximately 80%, and a median survival approaching 10 years.
                             In adult heart transplantation, following median sternotomy, the pericardium is opened with care being taken to
                             preserve the phrenic nerve. The aorta and vena cava are cannulated, the aorta is cross-clamped, and caval tapes (tour-
     Cardiovascular

                             niquets to prevent VAE) are applied. The aorta and PA are then transected. This is followed by an incision through
        Surgery

                             the atria, and the recipient heart is removed. The donor heart is prepared by opening the left atrium through the pul-
                             monary veins, separating the aorta and PA. The donor heart is attached by a long, continuous suture line around the
                             left atrium, followed by separate anastomoses to the inferior and superior vena cavae. Alternatively, the donor right
                             atrium is anastomosed to the recipient right atrium with a single long continuous suture. Next, the PA and aorta are
                             anastomosed to their respective recipient vessels. Multiple de-airing maneuvers are followed by aortic unclamping
                             and rewarming and resuscitation of the heart. NSR is established and CPB D/C’d. Heparin is reversed, hemostasis is
                             secured, and the chest is closed in a routine manner. Following chest closure, these patients will often have implanted
                             defibrillators that will be removed. An incision is made to access the pacemaker pocket, and the device is explanted.
                             After hemostasis is established, the pocket is closed. (See pp. 348+ for discussion of CPB.)

                             Neonatal heart transplantation differs in that the PA is cannulated if the ductus arteriosus is patent. Reconstruction of
                             the aortic arch in the patient with HLHS requires CPB with deep hypothermia (< 18°C) and circulatory arrest. The heart
                             is then excised, and the transverse aortic arch is opened beyond the ductus arteriosus to minimize risk of late coarctation.

                                                                                               Cross-clamp
                                                   Recipient pulmonary
                                                   artery

                                                Recipient aorta
                                                                                                                       Left atrium

                                            Recipient superior
                                            vena cava                                                                       Right atrium

                                             Recipient partial
                                             left atrium

                                            Recipient inferior
                                            vena cava                                                                        Donor heart

                                        Figure 6.4-1. The donor left atrium is sutured to the recipient left atrial remnant and
                                        the graft vessels are anastomosed.
                      464

===== PAGE 465 =====
Surgery for Heart Transplantation        465

                   The donor heart is prepared, with special attention given to trimming the transverse aortic tissue for subsequent recon-
                   struction. The left and right atrium, PA, and aorta are sutured in place. The new ascending aorta and right atrium are
                   cannulated, and CPB with rewarming is reinstituted. Chest closure is routine. (See Pediatric Transplantation p. 1468.)

                   Pediatric heart transplantation has become commonplace in the past 10 years. Patients often have had previous
                   cardiac surgery, and reentry and excision of the native heart are complicated by the presence of adhesions and graft
                   material from previous attempts at palliative/corrective surgery. Patients are often highly sensitized and may require
                   intraoperative plasmapheresis while on cardiopulmonary bypass. Preparation for cardiopulmonary bypass is often
                   similar to the adult heart transplant patient, and the implantation procedure is also similar. However, provisions
                   should be made for prolonged cross-clamp times necessary for implantation in the setting of abnormal systemic-
                   cardiac or pulmonary-cardiac connections. (See Pediatric Transplantation p. 1468.)

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cardiomyopathy; CAD with ischemic cardiomyopathy; CHD (e.g., HLHS or anomalous
                   left coronary artery); end-stage valvular heart disease

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Adult Heart Transplantation                        Neonatal/Pediatric Heart Transplantation

                     Position               Supine                                             ⇐

                     Incision               Median sternotomy                                  ⇐

                                                                                                                                                          Cardiovascular
                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                     Special                Ascending aortic, SVC, and IVC cannulae            Ascending aortic and right atrial cannulae
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Due to complete excision of the heart, use of      Deep hypothermia with circulatory arrest
                       considerations       a PA catheter is usually not feasible.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv                                 Cefazolin 25–50 mg/kg iv

                     Surgical time          Cross-clamp: 45–60 min                             Circulatory arrest: 45–60 min; Cross-clamp:
                                                                                               80–100 min
                                            Surgery: 3–4 h                                     Surgery: 4–6 h

                     Closing                Temporary AV pacing wires are occasionally         Temporary ventricular pacing wire is usually
                       considerations       placed. A PA catheter may be advanced, especial-   placed. Temporary transthoracic left atrial line
                                            ly with concerns about residual pulmonary HTN      may be placed. Extensive aortic suture line
                                            and donor right heart function. An isoproterenol   requires avoidance of postop hypertensive
                                            infusion is started intraop to keep HR = 100–110   episodes.
                                            and help improve right heart function and ↓ PVR.
                                            Inhaled NO may be used to further ↓ PVR.

                     EBL                    500–1500 mL                                        50–100 mL

                     Postop care            Cardiac ICU × 1–2 d of assisted ventilation;       Pediatric ICU × 1–2 d of assisted ventilation;
                                            2–3 d stay.                                        4–5 d stay, with attention to pulmonary care.

                     Mortality              < 5%                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity              Early acute rejection episodes from 10–21 d: 50%   ⇐
                                            Infection, particularly pulmonary: 10%
                                            Pulmonary HTN with right heart dysfunction:        Respiratory problems: 20%
                                            < 10%                                              Infection: 10%
                                            Dysrhythmias with nodal rhythms: 5%                Pulmonary vasospasm with right heart dys-
                                            Bleeding: 2–4%                                     function: < 10%
                                            Hyperacute rejection: Rare (< 1%)                  Bleeding: 2–4%
                                            Intracoronary air emboli

                     Pain score             8–10                                               8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              18–75+ yr (average 50–55 yr)                       1 d–2 mo (neonatal); 2 mo–18 yr (pediatric)

                     Male:Female            7:3                                                1:1

===== PAGE 466 =====
466    c h a p t e r 6.4    Heart/Lung Transplantation

                               ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                               Incidence               2200/yr (United States)                         Rare

                               Etiology                Cardiomyopathy (50%); CAD with multiple pre-    No apparent correlation with any specific
                                                       vious infarcts (48%); other (2%)                genetic disorder. Cardiomyopathy (49%); CHD
                                                                                                       (42%); other (7%)

                               Associated              CHF                                             Other congenital anomalies
                                 conditions

                                      ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                      PREOPERATIVE
                             Patients scheduled for heart transplantation are functionally compromised, typically with CHF, which is associated
                             with a mortality of > 50% in 2 yr. (Studies have shown that patients with severe CHF have a mortality of 50% in 6 mo.)
                             The progression of cardiovascular disease is usually well documented in these patients. A Hx of recent exacerbation of
                             cardiac dysfunction should be sought, and all data should be interpreted in light of interval changes. Patients may arrive
                             in the operating room from home or in hospital with inotropic infusions (dobutamine, milrinone) or VADS in place.
     Cardiovascular

                              Respiratory               The presence of pulmonary HTN and ↑ PVR may be disclosed by catheterization. The sever-
        Surgery

                                                        ity of the abnormality and the responsiveness to specific vasodilators must be determined.
                                                        Tests: Right heart catheterization

                              Cardiovascular            Indicators to consider include: hemodynamic status; LV EF (mortality is rapid in patients
                                                        with EF < 10% and is worse for patients with EF of 10–20%, as compared with those with
                                                        EF > 20%); myocardial structure and morphology, symptoms, and functional capacity; neu-
                                                        roendocrine status; serum sodium; and dysrhythmia. Unfortunately, while these measures
                                                        show trends with mortality, they are not individually strong enough to predict a particular
                                                        patient’s course. Low maximum O2 consumption (< 10 mL/kg/min) is associated with poor
                                                        survival. Normal O2 consumption is 40 mL/kg/min. In practice, however, this measure is
                                                        too severe because many patients awaiting heart transplantation have maximum O2 con-
                                                        sumption of 20 mL/kg/min. Dysrhythmia is a major cause of death; unfortunately electro-
                                                        physiology studies of these patients may not be helpful because dysrhythmia tends to be
                                                        noninducible. This phenomenon frustrates efforts to select and test antidysrhythmic drug
                                                        therapy. The effectiveness of past antidysrhythmic therapy should be reviewed.
                                                        Tests: ECG; cardiac catheterization; ECHO

                              Hematologic               Patients with dilated cardiomyopathy or previous cardiac surgery are frequently treated
                                                        with anticoagulants to reduce the risk of thrombus formation, although the efficacy of this
                                                        therapy has not been studied. Hepatic dysfunction may result from RV failure and may
                                                        reduce synthetic function. Mild hepatic dysfunction and chronic anticoagulation may con-
                                                        tribute to postop bleeding. The anticoagulant effect of warfarin should be reversed with
                                                        FFP and vitamin K (iv or subcutaneous).
                                                        Tests: Hct; PT; PTT; fibrinogen; Plts

                              Endocrine                 Neuroendocrine abnormalities are often present in severe CHF cases. The cardiomyopathy
                                                        produces low CO → compensatory sympathetic activation and renin-angiotensin activity.
                                                        The result is excessive vasoconstriction with salt and H2O retention, which further impair
                                                        myocardial performance. Markedly worse survival is seen in CHF patients with serum
                                                        sodium < 130. This may indicate the importance of neuroendocrine pathophysiology or
                                                        may simply be evidence of the severity of the CHF. It may also simply indicate that patients
                                                        with more severe CHF are treated with more diuretics. When patients are treated with an
                                                        angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, such as enalapril, the serum sodium is normal-
                                                        ized, and survival chances are improved because of the slowing of the progression of CHF,
                                                        not from alteration in the incidence of sudden death.
                                                        Tests: Electrolytes; Cr

                              Laboratory                Evidence of renal and hepatic dysfunction should be sought by H&P and lab studies. Hypo-
                                                        kalemia is generally not treated in view of the K+ in the graft.

===== PAGE 467 =====
Surgery for Heart Transplantation          467

                    Premedication            Although anxious, these patients are usually well informed and psychologically prepared to
                                             undergo heart transplantation. They respond well to the reassurance of the preop visit, and
                                             pharmacologic premedication usually is not necessary. O2 therapy should commence prior
                                             to transport of the patient to the OR. Reassuring the family of a patient who suffers from
                                             rapidly progressive cardiac dysfunction also is valuable. The patient may be at increased
                                             risk for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents because of the unscheduled nature of the
                                             surgery and use of oral cyclosporine immediately preop. Ranitidine (50 mg) and metoclo-
                                             pramide (10 mg) may be administered iv, most efficiently accomplished in the OR.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. After the patient is placed on the operating table, O2 and noninvasive monitors are
                   applied. Dyspnea (a complication of the supine position) can be treated by raising the back of the table. As infection is
                   a serious complication in the immunosuppressed transplant patient, aseptic technique is extremely important. Asep-
                   tic technique is used in inserting and securing all vascular catheters. The anesthesia machine should be equipped
                   with a supply of air to control the FiO2.

                    Induction                An arterial line for BP and blood gas monitoring should be inserted, using liberal amounts
                                             of local anesthetics before induction. There are rare exceptions to this rule, but the pres-

                                                                                                                                                           Cardiovascular
                                             ence of real-time BP monitoring is critical during induction. If infusion drugs (e.g., dopa-

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                                             mine) are necessary before insertion of the CVP catheter, they can be infused temporarily
                                             through a separate peripheral iv. In patients who have a ↓ EF, it is often helpful to infuse
                                             dopamine 3–10 mcg/kg/min during induction to avoid ↓ HR and ↓ CO. Anesthesia is not
                                             induced until the team harvesting the graft reports that the donor heart appears to be
                                             normal. The patient is preoxygenated (FiO2 = 1.0), and cricoid pressure is applied just be-
                                              fore induction. Induction agents include fentanyl (3–5 mcg/kg) or sufentanil (1–4 mcg/kg).
                                              Propofol (0.5–1 mg/kg, titrated) or etomidate (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) is useful in permitting
                                              rapid control of the airway. Midazolam also may be used. Vecuronium (0.15 mg/kg),
                                              rocuronium 1–1.5 mg/kg should be administered immediately to permit airway control.
                                              Care must be taken to avoid bradycardia, which often results in low CO in these
                                              patients. Immediate control of the airway is crucial, as hypercarbia and hypoxia must be
                                              avoided. The patient can be expected to have a low CO, resulting in a delayed induction of
                                              anesthesia, which must be anticipated to avoid anesthetic overdosage. Hypotension should
                                              be treated promptly with inotropes (bolus and/or infusion). Fluid boluses may be poorly
                                              tolerated in patients with diminished contractility and should be administered cautiously.
                                              The usual aids for managing the unexpectedly difficult airway should be readily available.
                                              Antibiotics are administered, and additional monitors (urinary catheter with thermistor,
                                              TEE) are set up. Nasopharyngeal temperature probes are avoided because full hepariniza-
                                              tion is needed for CPB. If there is a delay in the anticipated arrival of the graft, the recipient
                                              should be covered and kept warm, and skin prep should be delayed. Additional narcotics
                                              should be administered only in immediate anticipation of the commencement of surgery.

                    Maintenance              Typical cumulative anesthetic doses for the entire intraop course are fentanyl 15–20 mcg/kg
                                             or sufentanil 10–15 mcg/kg; midazolam 0.15 mg/kg; vecuronium 0.3 mg/kg or rocuronium
                                             3–5 mg/kg.

                    Termination of           Junctional rhythm is common in the denervated transplanted heart. Isoproterenol 10–75
                      CPB                    ng/kg/min or epinephrine 50–105 ng/kg/min may be used to achieve a HR of 100–120
                                             bpm. Isoproterenol is also useful in providing inotropic support and pulmonary vasodila-
                                             tion (see below). Atropine and neostigmine do not affect HR. HTN does not produce re-
                                             flex bradycardia. The graft atrium produces normally conducted P-waves if the right atrial
                                             cuff anastomosis is used. The graft-conductive tissue contains adrenergic receptors and
                                             responds normally to norepinephrine, epinephrine, and isoproterenol.
                                             Inotropic support with dopamine (2–10 mcg/kg/min), isoproterenol (10–150 ng/kg/min), and
                                             epinephrine (20–100 ng/kg/min) may be necessary, especially if pulmonary HTN promotes
                                             RV failure. Inhaled NO (20 ppm) may provide selective pulmonary vasodilation. A PA catheter
                                             may be helpful in guiding the use of inotropes and vasodilators and may be placed after CPB.

===== PAGE 468 =====
468    c h a p t e r 6.4   Heart/Lung Transplantation

                              Termination of         After termination of CPB, TEE may be of particular value in assessing RV dysfunction,
                                CPB (cont’d)         estimating PA pressures, and guiding appropriate fluid therapy, pharmacologic support,
                                                     and mechanical support as necessary. RV failure may be produced by the presence of air
                                                     in the RCA. Visual inspection may demonstrate this problem, and one should wait for the
                                                     passage of the air and the resolution of ischemia before terminating CPB.
                                                     SNP (0.2–2.0 mcg/kg/min) is used for afterload reduction. Inhaled NO, prostaglandin E1
                                                     (20–100 ng/kg/min), and NTG (0.2–2.0 mcg/kg/min) may be used for pulmonary vaso-
                                                     dilation, especially if a preop catheterization study demonstrates responsiveness of the
                                                     pulmonary circulation. Isoproterenol infusion (10–100 ng/kg/min) may provide appropri-
                                                     ate pulmonary vasodilation, chronotropy, and inotropy. IV fluid and vasodilators must be
                                                     given with particular care, as the flow produced by the denervated heart is quite sensitive
                                                     to preload.

                              Postbypass             Postbypass bleeding is a common problem brought on by the preop use of anticoagulants,
                                hemorrhage           the depressed synthetic function of the liver in chronic heart failure, and the effects of CPB.
                                                     Following administration of protamine, infusion of Plts, FFP, and RBCs may be necessary.
                                                     Cryoprecipitate is needed occasionally, especially for patients with previous chest surgery.
                                                     Epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA), or tranexamic acid may be appropriate in some cases.
                                                     If bleeding persists, consider recombinant factor VIIa or FEIBA.
                                                     Methylprednisolone 500 mg is given after bypass is terminated. Daclizumab 1 mg/kg is also
     Cardiovascular

                              Immuno-
                                                     administered after administration of protamine, and hemostasis has been secured.
        Surgery

                                suppression

                              Diuresis               There may be little urine production, especially if patient received high-dose diuretics
                                                     preop. Mannitol and furosemide may be needed to induce diuresis.

                              Transport              A Mapleson D or Jackson-Rees circuit is used in transporting the patient to the ICU. Seda-
                                                     tion with iv infusion of propofol (20–50 mcg/kg/min) or dexmedetomidine (0.4–0.8 mcg/
                                                     kg/min) may be used.

                              Blood and fluid        Possible severe bleeding                Bleeding is often a problem after termination of
                                 requirements        IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                      CPB. A second iv catheter is inserted in patients
                                                     NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                     with previous chest surgery.

                              Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).         Although it may be helpful to have a triple-lumen
                                                     Arterial line                           CVP line before induction for preload monitoring
                                                     CVP/PA catheter                         and infusion of potent infusion drugs, it is not
                                                     UO                                      essential. This line is usually inserted after the
                                                                                             patient is intubated to avoid patient dyspnea and
                                                                                             discomfort. A PA catheter is usually not inserted
                                                                                             before bypass because it must be removed during
                                                                                             surgery. An 8.5-Fr introducer is used in anticipation
                                                                                             that a PA catheter may be necessary to manage right
                                                                                             heart failure following the transplantation. In some
                                                                                             institutions (not Stanford), the left IJ vein is the pre-
                                                                                             ferred site of cannulation, which leaves the right
                                                                                             IJ unscarred for repeated postop endomyocardial
                                                                                             biopsy of the transplanted heart.
                                                     TEE                                     TEE is used to optimize fluid therapy, inotropic
                                                                                             agents, vasodilators, and chronotropic agents.

                              Positioning            3 and pad pressure points
                                                     3 eyes
                                                     Arms padded at sides
                                                     Chest roll

===== PAGE 469 =====
Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation           469

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            RV dysfunction                          RV failure may occur in patients with pulmonary
                                                                                     HTN and high RV afterload (see pulmonary HTN,
                                                                                     below).
                                             Pulmonary HTN                           Maneuvers which exacerbate pulmonary HTN
                                                                                     should be avoided. These include hypoxia, hypercar-
                                                                                     bia, acidosis, and low minute ventilation. Inhaled NO
                                                                                     can be used to treat pulmonary HTN (20–40 ppm
                                                                                     inspired concentration). Efforts to treat pulmonary
                                                                                     HTN with vasodilator therapy may be complicated
                                                                                     by impaired V/Q matching with hypoxemia and by
                                                                                     systemic ↓ BP producing poor coronary perfusion
                                                                                     and RV ischemia. Inotropic support of the RV may
                                                                                     be necessary (epinephrine 20–100 mg/kg/min, mil-
                                                                                     rinone 0.2–0.4 mg/kg/min). Isoproterenol infusion
                                             Oliguria                                (10–150 ng/kg/min) is attractive because it combines
                                             Drug side effects:                      inotropy, pulmonary vasodilation, and chronotropy.
                                             • Cyclosporine: HTN, nephrotox-        Preexisting impairment may → chronic ↓ UO state.
                                                icity, hepatotoxicity                Other renal problems may be related to cyclosporine

                                                                                                                                                      Cardiovascular
                                             • Corticosteroids: glucose intoler-    toxicity, diuretic toxicity, or CPB. Rx by optimizing

                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                                                ance, HTN, obesity, hyperlip-        hemodynamics. Consider reduction or elimination
                                                idemia, aseptic necrosis of hip,     of nephrotoxins and continuing use of diuretics. Cy-
                                                bowel perforation, infection         closporine nephrotoxicity occurs in most patients.
                                                                                     A functional toxicity with ↓ GFR occurs at low dose
                                                                                     and is reversible. Tubular toxicity with morphologic
                                                                                     changes occurs at high doses and is generally clini-
                                                                                     cally unimportant and reversible. The most serious
                                                                                     damage is vascular interstitial toxicity, which occurs
                                                                                     over months at high doses and is not reversible.

                    Pain                     PCA (see p. C-3) after weaning
                      management             from mechanical ventilation.

                    Tests                    Cr
                                             Hct

                   See Suggested Readings on page 478.

                   SURGERY FOR LUNG AND HEART/LUNG
                   TRANSPLANTATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: With the availability of cyclosporine, the ability to successfully transplant the heart and both lungs was
                   proven in monkeys and then successfully applied in a patient in March 1981. Subsequently, single-lung transplantation
                   was successfully performed in 1984 and an en bloc, double-lung transplant in 1986. Clinical lung transplantation of
                   these various types has increased markedly in the last few years, and currently, approximately 600 single-lung trans-
                   plants, 1000 bilateral lung transplants, and 30 heart/lung transplants are performed in the United States each year.
                   Current indications for heart/lung transplantation are primarily those of combined heart and lung disease,
                   including Eisenmenger’s syndrome due to a congenital heart defect with irreversible pulmonary HTN. Certain types
                   of diffuse lung disease, such as primary pulmonary HTN with significant right heart failure, are also treated in some
                   centers by heart/lung transplantation. Recipients for single-lung transplant usually have end-stage pulmonary disease
                   without significant sepsis. This includes patients with interstitial fibrosis, emphysema, and lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

===== PAGE 470 =====
470    c h a p t e r 6.4      Heart/Lung Transplantation

                             Some patients with pulmonary vascular disease, such as primary pulmonary HTN or pulmonary HTN associated with
                             an ASD, have undergone single-lung transplantation with or without cardiac repair. Bilateral lung transplantation is
                             now performed usually as a sequential single-lung transplant with the major indications being septic lung disease,
                             such as cystic fibrosis, chronic bronchiectasis, severe bullous emphysema, or pulmonary vascular disease with or
                             without cardiac repair. Current immunosuppressive protocols consist of a combination of tacrolimus with prednisone
                             and myophenolate mofetil, with or without early induction therapy, using a cytolytic agent (e.g., antithymocyte globu-
                             lin) or an IL-2 receptor or blocker (e.g., baciliximab). Immunosuppression may begin preop and continue throughout
                             the life of the patient. Current 1-yr survival rates average 70% for heart/lung transplants and 80% for lung transplants.
                             Heart/lung transplants usually are performed through a median sternotomy, although occasionally bilateral, trans-
                             sternal thoracotomy has been used. Single-lung transplants (usually left side) and bilateral sequential lung trans-
                             plants use a lateral thoracotomy, transsternal bilateral thoracotomy, or median sternotomy. Single- and double-lung
                             transplants are greatly facilitated with OLV, which is essential for these procedures. If this type of ventilation is not
                             feasible, a bronchial-blocker must be inserted through the operative field during pneumonectomy and reimplanta-
                             tion. CPB is routinely used for heart/lung transplantation and is used for either single- or bilateral-lung transplanta-
                             tion, depending on the stability of the patient during OLV and/or clamping of the PA. Patients with severe pulmonary
                             HTN undergoing single- or double-lung transplantation will almost always require CPB to reduce PA pressure during
                             clamping. For combined transplants, the recipient heart is removed as for standard heart transplantation (see Sur-
                             gery for Heart Transplantation, p. 464). A portion of the PA near the ligamentum arteriosum, however, is left intact
                             to preserve the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Next, each recipient lung is excised, and the trachea is transected above
                             the carina. For single-lung transplant, usually the recipient lung is excised, leaving a bronchial stump and vascular
     Cardiovascular

                             pedicles for the PA and veins (left atrium). For bilateral-lung transplants, both recipient lungs are removed, both
        Surgery

                             bronchi are resected just distal to the carina, and the main PA and left atrium prepared for subsequent anastomosis.
                             Implantation of the grafts involves a tracheal anastomosis, aortic and separate SVC and IVC anastomoses for
                             heart/lung transplants, and a bronchial anastomosis with PA and pulmonary venous anastomosis for single-lung
                             transplantation. Bilateral sequential lung transplants are performed as if they were single-lung transplants. CPB
                             requires heparinization and protamine reversal. Prior to closure, extensive exploration for potential bleeding sites
                             within the posterior mediastinum is carried out with placement of right and left pleural and mediastinal drainage.
                             Thoracotomies are closed in standard fashion with routine chest tube drainage.
                             Usual preop diagnosis: End-stage heart and lung disease, such as Eisenmenger’s syndrome; cystic fibrosis; pri-
                             mary pulmonary HTN; emphysema; bronchiectasis; lymphangioleiomyomatosis; interstitial pulmonary fibrosis; sar-
                             coidosis; other unusual forms of lung disease

                               ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                       Heart/Lung                       Single-Lung                      Bilateral-Lung
                                                       Transplantation                  Transplantation                  Transplantation

                               Position                Supine                           Lateral thoracotomy              Supine

                               Incision                Median sternotomy, usual;        Posterolateral thoracotomy       Transsternal bilateral thora-
                                                       bilateral anterior thoracoto-                                    cotomy; median sternotomy
                                                        my, occasionally

                               Special                 Ascending aortic, SVC, and       Occasional need for BB to be     ± Aortic, SVC, and IVC cannu-
                                 instrumentation       IVC cannulae                     inserted through the operative   lation; occasional need for BB.
                                                                                        field.

                                 Unique                  CPB. If recipient has had       ± CPB. Patient may be-           CPB. Thoracotomy usually
                                   considerations        previous thoracotomies,         come severely hypoxic or         is performed on left side
                                                         mediastinal collaterals         hypercarbic during OLV,          first, with implantation of
                                                         may cause troublesome           requiring CPB. During            lung on this side, followed
                                                         bleeding. Some patients         right thoracotomy, can-          by completion of right
                                                         with cystic fibrosis have       nulation can be performed        side thoracotomy and
                                                         severe bilateral scarring,      through the thorax, but          right-lung transplantation.
                                                         requiring extensive dissec-     left thoracotomy may             If patient becomes unsta-
                                                         tion to remove the recipi-      require femoral artery and       ble, cannulation in the tho-
                                                         ent lung.                       vein cannulation.                rax is usually possible to
                                                                                                                          facilitate transplantation.

===== PAGE 471 =====
Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation           471

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                            Heart/Lung                          Single-Lung                       Bilateral-Lung
                                            Transplantation                     Transplantation                   Transplantation

                     Antibiotics            Continue specific antibiotic        Cefazolin 2 g iv then 1g q 4 h    ⇐ With appropriate coverage
                                            regimen. Coverage for pseu-                                           for pseudomonas in patients
                                            domonas is suggested in                                               with cystic fibrosis.
                                            patients with cystic fibrosis.

                     Surgical time          4–5 h                               2–3 h                             5–6 h

                     Closing                Temporary pacing wire applied      Ventilation with as low an FiO2   ⇐
                       considerations       and isoproterenol infusion is       as possible to maintain a PO2
                                            usually started intraop to keep     > 90. Minimize iv fluids.
                                            HR between 100 and 110, as
                                            with a cardiac transplant.

                     EBL                    500–2000 mL                         < 500 mL (more if CPB is used)    500–2000 mL

                     Postop care            Cardiac ICU: 3–7 d; 1–2 d           ⇐                                 ⇐
                                            assisted ventilation

                                                                                                                                                            Cardiovascular
                     Mortality              10–15%                              5%                                5%

                                                                                                                                                               Surgery
                     Morbidity              Early acute rejection episodes      —                                 —
                                            from 10–21 d: 75%
                                            Infection, particularly pulmo-      ⇐                                 ⇐
                                            nary: 30–40%
                                            Pulmonary interstitial edema:       Bleeding: 2–4%                    ⇐
                                            20%                                 Bronchial leak or stenosis:
                                                                                2–4%                              ⇐
                                            Return for bleeding: 4–6%
                                            Hyperacute rejection: Rare

                     Pain score             8–10                                8–10                              8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                            Heart/Lung                          Single-Lung                       Bilateral-Lung
                                            Transplantation                     Transplantation                   Transplantation

                     Age range              3 mo–55 yr (average 30–40 yr)       1–65 yr                           ⇐

                     Male:Female            1:1                                 ⇐                                 ⇐

                     Incidence              ~30/yr (United States)              600/yr (United States)            1000/yr (United States)
                                            200/yr (worldwide)                  1,000/yr (worldwide)              2000/yr (worldwide)

                     Etiology               Eisenmenger’s syndrome;             Acquired chronic lung dis-        Cystic fibrosis; interstitial
                                            CHD; cystic fibrosis; pulmonary     ease; pulmonary HTN               fibrosis; emphysema
                                            HTN; other lung diseases

                     Associated             Severe cyanosis and polycythe-      Right heart dysfunction;          Diabetes mellitus; sinus infec-
                       conditions           mia; diabetes in patients with      pulmonary valve insuf-            tions in patients with cystic
                                            cystic fibrosis; sinus infections   ficiency and tricuspid valve      fibrosis
                                            in patients with cystic fibrosis    insufficiency

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR HEART/LUNG
                         TRANSPLANTATION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients scheduled for heart/lung transplantation are terminally ill, although they may still be able to maintain lim-
                   ited activity. Indications include primary pulmonary HTN with irreversible heart failure, Eisenmenger’s syndrome,

===== PAGE 472 =====
472    c h a p t e r 6.4   Heart/Lung Transplantation

                             and combined cardiac and pulmonary disease. The standard preanesthetic evaluation is supplemented with consid-
                             erations particular to these patients. The progression of disease is usually well documented.

                              Respiratory              Patients with severe pulmonary HTN (80/50 mm Hg) have enlarged PAs. Vocal cord
                                                       dysfunction (Sx: hoarseness, inability to phonate “e”) may occur when the left recurrent
                                                       laryngeal nerve is stretched by an enlarged PA, making these patients at increased risk for
                                                        pulmonary aspiration. Appropriate precautions to avoid aspiration should be taken (see
                                                        Induction, below).
                                                        Tests: ABG; cardiac catheterization

                              Cardiovascular           Hx of recent exacerbation of symptoms should be sought and cardiac catheterization data
                                                       interpreted in light of interval changes. The severity of pulmonary HTN and the respon-
                                                       siveness to specific vasodilators during catheterization should be reviewed.
                                                       Tests: ECG; cardiac catheterization; ECHO

                              Neurological             R → L intracardiac shunting may be present in patients with pulmonary HTN, and Hx of
                                                       embolic episodes should be sought. Extra care should be used to avoid injection of even
                                                       small quantities of intravenous air.

                              Hematologic              The medication schedule should be verified with particular attention to the recent use of
                                                       anticoagulants.
                                                       Tests: Hct; PTT; PT (special tubes required if severe polycythemia present 2° ↓ plasma
     Cardiovascular
        Surgery

                                                       volume); Plt count; fibrinogen

                              Laboratory               Evidence of renal and hepatic dysfunction should be sought by H&P and lab studies. Hy-
                                                       pokalemia is generally not treated because the heart/lung graft is preserved with K+ and
                                                       implantation will reverse hypokalemia.

                              Premedication            Although anxious, these patients are usually well informed and psychologically prepared.
                                                       They respond well to the reassurance of the preop visit, and pharmacologic premedication
                                                       usually is not necessary. O2 therapy should commence prior to transport of patient to the
                                                       OR. Patient may be at increased risk for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents because of
                                                       the unscheduled nature of the surgery and the presence of recurrent laryngeal nerve dam-
                                                       age. Ranitidine (50 mg) and metoclopramide (10–20 mg) may be administered iv preop.

                                      INTRAOPERATIVE
                             Anesthetic technique: GETA. Infection is a serious potential complication in the immunosuppressed transplant
                             patient; thus, aseptic technique is important. Aseptic technique is used in inserting and securing all vascular cath-
                             eters. The anesthesia machine should be equipped with a supply of air to permit control of the FiO2, and anesthesia is
                             not induced until the team harvesting the graft reports that it appears to be normal on direct inspection.

                              Induction                In the OR, the patient should be placed on the operating table and O2 and noninvasive
                                                       monitors applied. An arterial line for BP and blood gas monitoring should be inserted,
                                                       using liberal amounts of local anesthetics before induction. The presence of real-time BP
                                                       monitoring can be critical during induction. A patient who is dyspneic in the supine posi-
                                                       tion may be treated by raising the back of the table. Cricoid pressure may be used when the
                                                       patient is at risk for aspiration of gastric contents. A major goal of anesthetic induction is
                                                       the avoidance of further increases in PVR by guarding against respiratory acidosis, h ypoxia,
                                                       N2O, light anesthesia, and extremes of lung volume. When hemodynamically tolerated,
                                                       anesthetic is induced with titrated propofol (0.5–1 mg/kg) and fentanyl (2–5 mcg/kg).
                                                       Etomidate (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) may be used when hypotension limits administration of pro-
                                                       pofol and narcotics. Vecuronium (0.15 mg/kg) or rocuronium (1–1.5 mg/kg), should be
                                                       administered early to permit rapid airway control. Midazolam and scopolamine produce
                                                       amnesia. N2O is not used because it may exacerbate pulmonary HTN, reduces FiO2, and
                                                       expands intravascular air bubbles. Patient should be ventilated by mask and cricoid pres-
                                                       sure released only after the airway has been secured with a cuffed ETT. An ETT of internal
                                                       diameter of 8.0 mm or greater will facilitate FOB postop.

===== PAGE 473 =====
Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation           473

                    Maintenance        Typical total anesthetic doses for the entire intraop course are fentanyl 10–30 mcg/kg or
                                       sufentanil 10–15 mcg/kg; midazolam 0.2 mg/kg; vecuronium 0.3–0.5 mg/kg, or rocuroni-
                                       um 2–3 mg/kg.

                    Termination of     After the tracheal anastomosis is complete, the lungs are suctioned with a sterile catheter
                      CPB              and ventilated manually with air (FiO2 0.21). Tidal volumes should be sufficient to reinflate
                                       areas of atelectasis under direct vision. Steroids (methylprednisolone 250–500 mg) may be
                                       given as the lung is reperfused. Once rewarmed, full ventilation is begun with the lowest
                                       FiO2 to achieve SpO2 ≥ 90%, usually FiO2 = 0.4–0.5. Peak inspiratory pressures are typically
                                       20–30 cm H2O in the open chest. Optimal tidal volumes 6–8 mL/kg can be in part deter-
                                       mined by direct visualization and lung protection strategy. PEEP may be added to optimize
                                       SpO2 as well as inhaled NO.
                                       Junctional rhythm is common in the denervated transplanted heart. Epinephrine
                                       (50–150 ng/kg/min) or isoproterenol (10–75 ng/kg/min) is used to achieve a HR of
                                       100–120. When sinus rhythm is achieved, it is common to see two P-waves if a biatrial
                                       anastomosis has been used. The residual atrial tissue produces nonconducting P-waves.
                                       Responses mediated by vagal tone will be seen in the rate of the original atrial tissue and
                                       have no clinical importance beyond the ease with which the ECG is interpreted.
                                       In the denervated heart, atropine and neostigmine will not affect HR, and HTN will not
                                       produce reflex bradycardia. The graft atrium produces normally conducted P-waves. The

                                                                                                                                               Cardiovascular
                                       transplanted heart contains adrenergic receptors and responds normally to norepineph-

                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                                       rine, epinephrine, and isoproterenol.
                                       The CO of the denervated heart is quite sensitive to preload; thus, iv fluid and vasodilators
                                       must be given with particular care. SNP is used for afterload reduction. TEE may be of
                                       particular value in assessing RV dysfunction and guiding appropriate fluid therapy, phar-
                                       macologic support, and mechanical support as necessary. Inhaled NO, PGE1 (20–100 ng/
                                       kg/min), isoproterenol, and NTG (0.2–2.0 mcg/kg/min) also may be used for pulmonary
                                       vasodilation. Inotropic support with dopamine (2–10 mcg/kg/min), isoproterenol, and
                                       epinephrine (20–100 ng/kg/min) may be necessary, especially if pulmonary HTN and RV
                                       failure occur. TEE is useful in evaluating the PA anastomosis (diameter > 1 cm) and pulmo-
                                       nary veins (diameter > 0.5 cm). Flow rates by Doppler should be ≤ 100 cm/sec.

                    Immuno-            Methylprednisolone 500 mg iv is given after bypass is terminated.
                      suppression

                    Diuresis           There may be little urine production, especially if patient received high-dose diuretics
                                       preop. Cyclosporine may exacerbate renal dysfunction. Mannitol and furosemide may be
                                       needed to induce diuresis.

                    Transport          A sterile, disposable Jackson-Rees system is used in transporting the patient to the ICU.

                    Blood and fluid    Anticipate large blood loss.           Bleeding is often a major problem after termina-
                       requirements    IV: 14–16 ga × 2                       tion of CPB. Patients with intracardiac defects are
                                                                              at increased risk for cerebral embolic events. Care
                                                                              must be taken to remove all air bubbles from intra-
                                                                              vascular lines.

                    Control of blood   Postbypass bleeding is a common        Postbypass bleeding is exacerbated by preop use of
                      loss             problem.                               anticoagulants, depressed synthetic liver function,
                                                                              trauma of CPB, and/or previous chest surgery.
                                       Coagulation therapy necessary.         Coagulation therapy may include: protamine (30 mg/
                                                                              kg); Plts; FFP; RBCs; EACA (300 mcg/kg); DDAVP
                                                                              (0.3 mcg/kg).
                                       Possible severe bleeding               Severe bleeding prompts further therapy: cryo-
                                                                              precipitate, Feiba VH (factor 8 inhibitor bypassing
                                                                              activity), and/or recombinant factor 7a.

===== PAGE 474 =====
474    c h a p t e r 6.4   Heart/Lung Transplantation

                              Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                     Arterial line
                                                     CVP/PA catheter                          The CVP catheter is usually placed following anes-
                                                     UO                                       thetic induction. An introducer permits the rapid
                                                                                              insertion of a PA catheter when necessary. A “dou-
                                                                                              ble-stick” technique, placing both a triple lumen
                                                                                              CVL and a 9-F introducer in the right IJ is some-
                                                                                              times used. In some centers (not Stanford) the left
                                                                                              IJ vein is the preferred site of cannulation, leaving
                                                                                              the right IJ unscarred for repeated endomyocardial
                                                                                              biopsies of the transplanted heart.
                                                     TEE                                      TEE is used to optimize volume status (LV + RV
                                                                                              size), inotropic agents (LV + RV contractility), vaso-
                                                                                              dilators, and chronotropic agents.

                                      POSTOPERATIVE

                              Complications          Oliguria                                 Diuresis may be induced with mannitol and
                                                                                              furosemide.
     Cardiovascular

                                                     Pulmonary edema                          Given the lack of lymphatic drainage in the trans-
        Surgery

                                                                                              planted lung, pulmonary edema may occur. Diure-
                                                                                              sis and restriction of iv fluid may be required.
                                                     RV dysfunction                           RV failure may occur in patients with pulmonary
                                                                                              HTN and high RV afterload (see Pulmonary HTN
                                                                                              Rx, below).
                                                     Hypoxia                                  If oxygenation does not improve with increasing
                                                                                              FiO2, PEEP, tidal volumes, and/or inhaled NO,
                                                                                              ECMO may be considered.
                                                     Pulmonary HTN                            Maneuvers that exacerbate pulmonary HTN should
                                                                                              be avoided. These include hypoxia, hypercarbia,
                                                                                              acidosis, and hypoventilation. Inhaled NO can
                                                                                              be used to treat pulmonary HTN (20 parts per
                                                                                              million inspired concentration). Efforts to treat
                                                                                              pulmonary HTN with vasodilator therapy may
                                                                                              be complicated by impaired V/Q matching with
                                                                                              hypoxemia and by systemic hypotension, producing
                                                                                              poor right coronary perfusion and RV ischemia.
                                                                                              Inotropic support of the RV may be necessary. Iso-
                                                                                              proterenol is attractive because it combines inot-
                                                                                              ropy, pulmonary vasodilation, and chronotropy.
                                                     Rejection                                Monitor rejection Sx with transvenous endomyo-
                                                     Infection                                cardial biopsy and transbronchial biopsy.
                                                     Drug side effects:
                                                     • Cyclosporine: HTN, nephrotoxic-       Cyclosporine nephrotoxicity occurs in most pa-
                                                        ity, hepatotoxicity                   tients. A functional toxicity with reduced GFR oc-
                                                     • Corticosteroids: glucose intoler-     curs at low dose and is reversible. Tubular toxicity
                                                        ance, HTN, obesity, hyperlip-         with morphologic changes occurs at high doses and
                                                        idemia, aseptic necrosis of hip,      generally is clinically unimportant and reversible.
                                                        bowel perforation, infection          The most serious damage is vascular interstitial tox-
                                                     • Azathioprine: anemia, thrombocy-      icity, which occurs over months at high doses and is
                                                        topenia, leukopenia, hepatotoxicity   not reversible.

                              Pain                   PCA (see p. C-3).
                                management

                             See Suggested Readings on page 478.

===== PAGE 475 =====
Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation           475

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR LUNG
                         TRANSPLANTATION
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The patient presenting for lung transplantation typically has end-stage pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema, cystic fibro-
                   sis, or bronchiectasis. Pulmonary HTN also may be treated by lung transplantation. The progression of the disease is
                   usually well documented; however, Hx of recent exacerbation of symptoms should be sought.

                    Respiratory             Assess the patient’s ability to undergo OLV by review of the V/Q scan. If little perfusion of
                                            the nonoperative lung is present, anticipate the need for CPB. The extent of the restrictive
                                            lung disease and diffusion abnormality must be assessed preop. For example, room-air
                                            PaO2 < 45 mm Hg predicts the need for CPB.
                                            Tests: PFT; V/Q scan; ABG

                    Airway                  Patients with severe pulmonary HTN (80/50 mm Hg) have enlarged pulmonary arter-
                                            ies. Vocal cord dysfunction (Sx: hoarseness, inability to phonate “e”) may occur when the
                                            left recurrent laryngeal nerve is stretched by an enlarged PA, making these patients at
                                            increased risk for pulmonary aspiration; therefore, appropriate precautions to avoid aspi-
                                            ration should be taken (see Induction, below).

                                                                                                                                                    Cardiovascular
                    Cardiovascular          Evidence of RV dysfunction with tricuspid regurgitation should be sought by physical

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                                            exam, ECHO, and cardiac catheterization. RV ejection fraction (EF) may be estimated with
                                            radionuclide ventriculography (normal EF = > 50%). Pulmonary HTN is considered to be
                                            severe and may produce RV failure when pressure is > 2/3 of systemic arterial pressure.
                                            Note response to specific vasodilators recorded during catheterization.
                                            Tests: Preview cardiac catheterization data; ECG; mean PAP > 40 mm Hg and PVR >
                                            5 mm Hg/min/L may predict the need for partial CPB.

                    Neurological            R → L intracardiac shunting may be present in patients with pulmonary HTN, and Hx of
                                            embolic episodes should be sought. Extra care should be used to avoid injection of even
                                            small quantities of intravenous air.

                    Musculoskeletal         Chronic cachexia precludes the procedure.

                    Hematologic             Polycythemia 2° chronic hypoxemia is common. Autologous blood is collected as CPB is
                                            initiated.
                                            Tests: Hct; coagulation studies require special blood tubes to correct for low plasma vol-
                                            ume in patients with severe polycythemia.

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Patients awaiting lung transplantation are generally well informed about the planned peri-
                                            operative course. These patients respond well to the reassurance of the preop visit, and
                                            pharmacologic premedication usually is not necessary. O2 therapy, with the usual home O2
                                            regimen, should commence prior to transport to the OR. Patient may be at ↑ risk for pul-
                                            monary aspiration of gastric contents because of the unscheduled nature of the surgery, the
                                            use of oral cyclosporin immediately before surgery, and the presence of recurrent laryngeal
                                            nerve damage. Ranitidine (50 mg) and metoclopramide (10–20 mg) may be administered
                                            iv before surgery.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. Typically, OLV through a DLT is required for single-lung transplants and may be
                   requested for BSLT to facilitate pre-CPB dissection and reperfusion. Also, some institutions (not Stanford) perform
                   BSLT without CPB (standby only), thus requiring OLV. Consider ETT/BB in cystic fibrosis patients with tenacious
                   sputum. Infection is a serious complication in the immunosuppressed transplant patient; thus, the aseptic technique
                   is important. Aseptic technique is used in inserting and securing all vascular catheters.

===== PAGE 476 =====
476    c h a p t e r 6.4   Heart/Lung Transplantation

                              Induction              An arterial line for BP and blood gas monitoring should be inserted, using liberal amounts
                                                     of local anesthetics before induction. The presence of real-time BP monitoring can be criti-
                                                     cal during induction. After receiving confirmation from the procurement team regarding
                                                     donor lung suitability and estimated arrival time, induction is begun. After preoxygen-
                                                     ation, midazolam 0.2–0.4 mg/kg; fentanyl 2–4 mcg/kg; propofol (0.5–1 mg/kg) or etomi-
                                                     date 0.2–0.3 mg/kg; and rocuronium 1–1.5 mg/kg or vecuronium (0.1–0.2 mg/kg) is typi-
                                                     cally used. Cricoid pressure must be used when the patient is at risk for aspiration because
                                                     of the unscheduled nature of the surgery and possible vocal cord dysfunction associated
                                                     with stretch injury of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Avoid further increases in PVR by
                                                     guarding against hypoxemia, acidosis, hypercarbia, light anesthesia, and inadequate min-
                                                     ute ventilation.

                              Maintenance            Typically, narcotic/O2/air/± isoflurane (in absence of hypoxemia and right heart failure).
                                                     Typical total anesthetic doses for the entire intraop course: fentanyl 10–20 mcg/kg or suf-
                                                     entanil 10–15 mcg/kg, midazolam 0.2 mg/kg, vecuronium 0.5–1 mg/kg, or rocuronium
                                                     0.2–0.3 mg/kg.

                              Emergence              Before closure of the chest, lungs are inflated under direct vision to reinflate atelectatic
                                                     areas and check adequacy of bronchial closure. At the conclusion of surgery, both lumens
                                                     of the DLT should be suctioned and the tube replaced with a single-lumen 8.0-mm or
                                                     larger ETT to facilitate bronchoscopy. The patient is transported to the ICU intubated and
     Cardiovascular

                                                     ventilated.
        Surgery

                              Blood and fluid        IV: 14 or 16 ga × 1–2                  Patients with intracardiac defects are at increased
                                 requirements        NS/LR @ 4 mL/kg/h                      risk for cerebral embolic events; take care to
                                                                                            remove all air bubbles from intravascular lines and
                                                                                            syringes.

                              Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        ECG leads should be covered with tape to ensure
                                                     Arterial line                          that electrical contact is not degraded by prep solu-
                                                     PA catheter                            tion or blood. Be careful of air embolization during
                                                     Urinary catheter with thermistor       catheter insertion. Patients who are profoundly dys-
                                                                                            pneic (→ high negative intrathoracic pressure) are
                                                                                            at high risk for VAE; consider inserting the catheter
                                                                                            after GA and IPPV have been instituted. Oxygen-
                                                                                            ation must be watched closely.
                                                     TEE                                    Assessment of RV size and function (normal EF =
                                                                                            0.5–0.7) may be helpful.

                              OLV                    DLT: 41 Fr (men); 39 Fr (women)        A DLT is inserted in the left mainstem bronchus to
                                                                                            permit surgical access. FOB is used to verify prop-
                                                                                            er tube placement. Positioning of the bronchial
                                                                                            cuff in the proximal left mainstem bronchus does
                                                                                            not interfere with surgical access to the bronchus.
                                                                                            The position of the DLT should be verified after
                                                                                            the patient is moved to the lateral position for SLT.
                                                                                            Finally, verify ventilation and proper functioning
                                                                                            of the tube. Apply O2 with CPAP at 5 cmH2O to
                                                                                            the nondependent lung. Further adjustment of
                                                                                            CPAP may enhance oxygenation. The nondepen-
                                                                                            dent lung may be reinflated with O2, if necessary,
                                                                                            to achieve adequate oxygenation. If adequate
                                                                                            oxygenation cannot be achieved, CPB should be
                                                                                            initiated.
                                                     Frequent suctioning                    Frequent suctioning is necessary in patients with
                                                                                            tenacious secretions.

===== PAGE 477 =====
Surgery for Lung and Heart/Lung Transplantation         477

                    PA clamping       Improve V/Q mismatch.                     Clamping of the PA will improve V/Q mismatch and
                                      Improve oxygenation.                      oxygenation; however, severe pulmonary HTN and
                                      PAP ↑↑→ RV failure                        RV failure may develop. Vasodilators, such as NTG
                                                                                (0.2–2 mcg/kg/min), SNP (0.2–10 mcg/kg/min),
                                                                                PGE1 (20–100 ng/kg/min), or inhaled NO (20–40
                                                                                ppm) should be used to treat pulmonary HTN and
                                                                                ↓ RV afterload; however, care must be taken to avoid
                                                                                systemic hypotension. Inotropic support for the RV
                                                                                may be necessary (dopamine [2–10 mcg/kg/min] or
                                                                                epinephrine [20–100 ng/kg/min]). TEE and right
                                                                                atrial pressure should be monitored for evidence of
                                                                                tricuspid regurgitation associated with RV dilation.

                    PA unclamping     PIP: 20–25 cmH2O                          Temporary unclamping of the PA may be neces-
                                      O2 sat: 90–100%                           sary to allow further pharmacologic therapy. If RV
                                      PEEP: 5–10 mm Hg                          failure cannot be controlled pharmacologically,
                                                                                CPB should be initiated. The PA should not be
                                                                                unclamped until ventilation is possible to the trans-
                                                                                planted lung. Perfusion without oxygenation of the
                                                                                transplanted lung would produce profound shunt

                                                                                                                                                Cardiovascular
                                                                                and hypoxemia. TV should be adjusted to eliminate

                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                                                                atelectasis and to achieve a PIP of 20–25 cmH2O
                                                                                with the chest open. The FiO2 (0.3–0.5) is limited in
                                                                                the hope of curtailing free radical injury. PEEP and
                                                                                inhaled NO may be used to enhance oxygenation.

                    Positioning       For single-lung:                          Verify correct position of DLT or BB after moving
                                      • Supine to lateral decubitus             patient to the lateral position.
                                      • Axillary roll
                                      • Airplane splint
                                      • Avoid arm hyperextension
                                        (> 90°).
                                      For double-lung:
                                      • Supine with arms above head for        Difficult access to airway after patient positioned.
                                         bilateral subcostal incision           *NB: potential for kinking of iv and arterial lines
                                      3 and pad pressure points
                                      3 eyes

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications     Pulmonary edema                           Given the lack of lymphatic drainage in the trans-
                                      Infection: bacterial, viral, fungal, or   planted lung, pulmonary edema may occur. Diure-
                                      protozoan                                 sis and restriction of iv fluid may be required. Man-
                                                                                nitol and furosemide can be used to induce diuresis.
                                      Side effects of immunosuppressive         Immunosuppression drugs typically include: tacro-
                                      agents:                                   limus, myophenolate mofetil, and corticosteroids.
                                      • Corticosteroids: HTN, osteo-           Early induction therapy with a cytolytic agent (e.g.,
                                         porosis, glucose intolerance,          antithymocyte globulin) may be used.
                                         hyperlipidemia
                                      • Azathioprine: anemia, thrombo-
                                        cytopenia, leukopenia

                    Pain              Epidural narcotics (see p. C-3)           Postop analgesia may be provided by infusion of
                      management      Parenteral narcotics (see p. C-3)         narcotics through an epidural catheter. If CPB is
                                                                                used, the insertion of the epidural catheter should
                                                                                be delayed until normal coagulation function is
                                                                                documented in the ICU.

===== PAGE 478 =====
478    c h a p t e r 6.4       Heart/Lung Transplantation

                             Suggested Readings
                                1. Baez B, Castillo M: Anesthetic considerations for lung transplantation. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2008; 12(2):122–7.
                                2. Benumof JL, Partridge BL, Salvatierra C, et al: Margin of safety in positioning modern double-lumen endotracheal tubes.
                                   Anesthesiology 1987; 67(5):729–38.
                                3. Carere R, Patterson GA, Liu P, et al: Right and left ventricular performance after single and double lung transplantation. The
                                   Toronto Lung Transplant Group. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1991; 102(1):115–23.
                                4. Chetham PM: Anesthesia for heart or single or double lung transplantation in the adult patient. J Card Surg 2000; 15(3):
                                   167–74.
                                5. Della Rocca G, Pugliese F, Antonini M, et al: Hemodynamics during inhaled nitric oxide in lung transplant candidates.
                                   Transplant Proc 1997; 29:3367–70.
                                6. Dietrich CC, Tobias JD: Intraoperative administration of nitric oxide. J Intensive Care Med 2003; 18(3):146–9.
                                7. DiNardo JA, Zavara DA: Anesthesia for heart, heart-lung and lung transplantation. In: Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 3rd
                                   edition. Blackwell Science, Boston: 2008, 252–88.
                                8. Dwarakanata K, Rother AL, Collard CD: Anesthetic management of cardiac transplantation. In: Hensley FA Jr, Martin DE,
                                   Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013,
                                   481–505.
                                9. Feltracco P, Serra E, Barbieri S, et al: Anesthetic concerns in lung transplantation for severe pulmonary hypertension.
                                   Transplant Proc 2007; 39(6):1976–80.
                               10. Hurford WE, Kolker AC, Strauss W: The use of ventilation/perfusion lung scans to predict oxygenation during one-lung
                                   anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1987; 67(5):841–4.
                               11. Koster A: Anesthesia for cardiac transplantation: a practical overview. Appl Cariopulm Pathophys 2011; 15(4):213–9.
                               12. Macdonald P, Mundy J, Rogers P, et al: Successful treatment of life-threatening acute reperfusion injury after lung
                                   transplantation with inhaled nitric oxide. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995; 110:861–3.
     Cardiovascular

                               13. Mair P, Balogh D: Anaesthetic and intensive care considerations for patients undergoing heart or lung transplantation. Acta
        Surgery

                                   Anaesthesiol Scand 1997; 111:78–9.
                               14. Marshall SE, Lewiston NJ, Kramer MR, et al: Prospective analysis of serial pulmonary function studies and transbronchial
                                   biopsies in single-lung transplant recipients. Transplant Proc 1991; 23(1 P+2):1217–19.
                               15. Maurer JR, Winton TL, Patterson GA, et al: Single-lung transplantation for pulmonary vascular disease. Transplant Proc
                                   1991; 23(1 P+2):1211–12.
                               16. Patterson GA: Indications. Unilateral, bilateral, heart-lung, and lobar transplant procedures. Clin Chest Med 1997; 18:
                                   225–30.
                               17. Quinlan JJ, Murray AW, Casta A: Anesthesia for heart, lung, and heart-lung transplantation In: Kaplan JA, Reich DL, Savina
                                   JS, eds. Kaplan’s Cardiac Anesthesia: The Echo Era, 6th edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia: 2011, 737–54.
                               18. Ramakrishna H: Adult cardiac transplantation, PART I. Annals Card Anesth 2009; 12(1):71–8.
                               19. Ramakrishna H: Adult cardiac transplantation, PART II. Annals Card Anesth 2009; 12(2):155–65.
                               20. Siegel LC, Brodsky JB: Choice of anesthetic agents for intrathoracic surgery. In: Kaplan JA, ed. Thoracic Anesthesia, 2nd
                                   edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 1991.
                               21. Slinger P, Sullivan EA: Anesthetic management for surgery of the lungs and mediastinum. In: Hensley FA, Jr, Martin DE,
                                   Gravlee GP, eds. A Practical Approach to Cardiac Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013,
                                   737–85.
                               22. Smith CM: Patient selection, evaluation, and preoperative management for lung transplant candidates. Clin Chest Med 1997;
                                   18:183–97.
                               23. Thomas Z, et al: Anesthetic management of cardiac transplantation. In: Hensley Jr FA, et al, eds. A Practical Approach to
                                   Cardiac Anesthesia, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 439–63.
                               24. Williams EL, Jellish WS, Modica PA, et al: Capnography in a patient after single lung transplantation. Anesthesiology 1991;
                                   74(3):621–2.

