# 7_GENERAL_SURGERY
# Source: 7 GENERAL SURGERY.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 7.0 General Surgery
# Pages: 482-756
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Esophagostomy (p. 482)
- Esophageal Diverticulectomy (p. 483)
- Management Of Esophageal Perforation (p. 487)
- Esophagomyotomy (p. 489)
- Esophagogastric Fundoplasty (p. 490)
- Esophagectomy (p. 492)
- Gastric Or Duodenal Perforation (p. 505)
- Operations For Peptic Ulcer Disease (p. 506)
- Open Operations For Morbid Obesity (p. 511)
- Gastrostomy Placement (p. 517)
- Duodenotomy (p. 520)
- Open Appendectomy (p. 521)
- Excision Of Meckel’S Diverticulum (p. 523)
- Enterostomy (p. 526)
- Continent Ileostomy Pouch (Kock) (p. 528)
- Small-Bowel Resection With Anastomosis (p. 530)
- Enterolysis (p. 532)
- Closure Of Enteric Fistulae (p. 533)
- Total Proctocolectomy (p. 539)
- Segmental (Partial) Colectomy (p. 542)
- Stoma Closure Or Peristomal Hernia Repair (p. 545)
- Operations For Rectal Prolapse (p. 549)
- Surgery For Anal Fistulas (p. 554)
- Hemorrhoidectomy/Stapled Hemorrhoidopexy (p. 556)
- Operations For Fecal Incontinence (p. 558)
- Hepatic Resection (p. 564)
- Hepatorrhaphy (p. 566)
- Open Cholecystectomy And Common Bile Duct Exploration (p. 572)
- Biliary Drainage Procedures (p. 574)
- Excision Of Bile Duct Tumor (p. 577)
- Choledochal Cyst Excision Or Anastomosis (p. 578)
- Laparoscopic Repair Of Perforated Peptic Ulcer (p. 584)
- Laparoscopic Heller Myotomy ± Antireflux Procedure (p. 588)
- Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, ± Common Duct Exploration (p. 589)
- Laparoscopic Splenectomy (p. 595)
- Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy (p. 599)
- Laparoscopic Bowel Resection (p. 602)
- Laparoscopic Appendectomy (p. 605)
- Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Repair (p. 609)
- Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery (p. 611)
- Operative Drainage For Pancreatitis (p. 624)
- Drainage Of Pancreatic Pseudocyst (p. 625)
- Pancreatectomy (p. 629)
- Whipple Resection (p. 632)
- Exploratory Or Staging Laparotomy (p. 640)
- Splenectomy (p. 645)
- Retroperitoneal Tumors (p. 647)
- Drainage Of Subphrenic Abscess (p. 649)
- Inguinal Herniorrhaphy (p. 651)
- Femoral Herniorrhaphy (p. 653)
- Repair Of Incisional Hernia (p. 654)
- Repair Of Abdominal Dehiscence (p. 655)
- Breast Biopsy (p. 660)
- Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy (p. 661)
- Breast-Conserving Surgery And Mastectomy ± Reconstruction (p. 664)
- Excision Of Thyroglossal Duct Cyst (p. 670)
- Thyroidectomy (p. 672)
- Parathyroidectomy (p. 678)
- Adrenalectomy (p. 683)
- Kidney Transplantation—Cadaveric And Live-Donor (p. 694)
- Cadaveric Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation (p. 696)
- Live-Donor Nephrectomy—Laparoscopic And Open (p. 700)
- Kidney Transplant Nephrectomy (p. 702)
- Living-Donor Liver Transplantation (p. 718)
- Multiorgan Procurement (p. 720)
- Emergency Tube Thoracostomy (p. 730)
- Emergency Department Thoracotomy (p. 732)
- Exploratory Surgery For Neck Trauma (p. 733)
- Chest Trauma: Pericardial Window, Release Of Tamponade, Repair Of Cardiac Laceration (p. 737)
- Chest Trauma: Repair Of Great Vessels (p. 740)
- Repair Of Tracheobronchial Injury (p. 741)
- Abdominal Trauma: Damage Control (p. 745)
- Abdominal Trauma: Hepatic And Splenic Injuries (p. 747)
- Abdominal Trauma: Vascular Injuries (p. 749)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                     7.0 GENERAL SURGERY

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.1 Esophageal
                                            Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Richard I. Whyte, MD, MBA
                                            Jeffrey A. Norton, MD

                                            anesthesiologist
                                            Vivek Kulkarni, MD

===== PAGE 482 =====
ESOPHAGOSTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Esophagostomy is performed to divert oral secretions away from the esophagus to a stoma in certain
                                types of esophageal perforation. To perform an esophagostomy, the esophagus is approached through a left cervi-
                                cal incision. The sternocleidomastoid muscle and carotid sheath are retracted laterally and the thyroid medially,
                                exposing the cervical esophagus (Fig. 7.1-1). The esophagus is mobilized with care being taken not to injure the left
                                recurrent laryngeal nerve, which typically lies in the tracheoesophageal groove. The esophagus is brought to the skin
                                surface as a loop or end stoma and sutured to the skin with absorbable sutures.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: The procedure is usually performed via a left cervical approach; the right side
                                is an alternative.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Esophageal perforation; distal esophageal obstruction

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine, with head rotated to right

                                 Incision                Cervical

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop
        General Surgery

                                 Surgical time           45 min

                                 EBL                     25–50 mL

                                 Postop care             Stoma pouch to collect saliva
                                                         PACU → ward

                                 Mortality               < 0.1%

                                 Morbidity               Skin irritation: 15–20%
                                                         Saliva leakage: 5–10%
                                                         Wound infection: < 5%
                                                         Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury: 1–2%

                                 Pain score              5–7

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               20–60 yr

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Not uncommon

                                 Etiology                Surgically created

                                 Associated              Esophageal perforation; pharyngeal cancer
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Esophageal Surgery following Esophagectomy, p. 494.

                          482

===== PAGE 483 =====
Esophageal Diverticulectomy        483

                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                               Figure 7.1-1. Surgical anatomy for cervical esophagostomy. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Nora PF, ed: Operative Surgery Principles and Techniques. WB
                               Saunders, Philadelphia: 1990.)

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Carrott PW Jr, Low DE: Advances in the management of esophageal perforation. Thorac Surg Clin 2011; 21(4):541–55.
                     2. Wu JT, Mattox KL, Wall MJ Jr: Esophageal perforations: new perspectives and treatment paradigms. J Trauma 2007;
                        63:1173–84.

                   ESOPHAGEAL DIVERTICULECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Esophageal diverticula are divided into three anatomic types: pharyngoesophageal (Zenker’s),
                   midesophageal, and epiphrenic. Structurally, they are either “true” diverticula—meaning they consist of all three
                   layers of the esophageal wall (mucosa, submucosa, and muscularis)—or “false” diverticula consisting of only mu-
                   cosa (or mucosa and submucosa). Pharyngoesophageal diverticula account for 60–65% of all cases. These are
                   false diverticula that originate in Killian’s triangle, a weak point in the posterior esophagus, just proximal to the
                   transverse fibers of the cricopharyngeal muscle (Fig. 7.1-2A). They are associated with incomplete, or discoor-
                   dinate, upper esophageal sphincter relaxation and the resultant increased hypopharyngeal pressure produces a

===== PAGE 484 =====
484   c h a p t e r 7.1   Esophageal Surgery

                                                            A                                       B

                                                                               Thyropharyngeus
                                                                               muscle

                                                                               Killian’s triangle

                                                                               Cricopharyngeus
                                                                               muscle

                                          Figure 7.1-2. Formation of Zenker’s diverticulum. A: Herniation of the pharyngeal
                                          mucosa and submucosa occurs at the point of potential weakness (Killian’s triangle
                                          [arrow]) between the oblique fibers of the thyropharyngeus muscle and the more
                                          horizontal fibers of the cricopharyngeus muscle. B: As the diverticulum enlarges,
        General Surgery

                                          it drapes over the cricopharyngeus sphincter and descends into the superior
                                          mediastinum in the prevertebral space. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield
                                          LJ, Mulholland, MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice,
                                          3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001. After Orringer MB:
                                          Diverticula and miscellaneous conditions of the esophagus. In: Sabiston DC Jr, ed.
                                          Textbook of Surgery, 13th edition. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 1986.)

                                narrow-mouthed posterior diverticulum. These diverticula frequently present in the seventh decade and are 2–3
                                times more common in men. Symptoms depend on the stage of the disease. Early on, patients may complain of
                                vague pharyngeal sensations, dysphagia, cough, and excess salivation. Later, more severe symptoms—such as se-
                                vere (or frequent) dysphagia, regurgitation of food, halitosis, voice changes, aspiration, and odynophagia (painful
                                swallowing)—may occur.
                                Surgery is the only effective therapy for Zenker’s diverticulum. Respiratory complications (aspiration) or
                                nutritional deficiencies (weight loss) may be directly attributable to the diverticulum and should not be con-
                                 traindications to surgery. Multiple different operative approaches are advocated: diverticulectomy alone, cri-
                                 copharyngeal myotomy, diverticulectomy with myotomy, and myotomy with suspension of the diverticu-
                                 lum. Myotomy alone, which corrects the underlying physiologic abnormality, is up to 78% effective and may
                                 be considered for patients with small (< 2 cm) diverticula. Diverticulectomy or suspension should be added
                                 if the diverticulum itself is large or dependent. Both procedures are performed via a left cervical incision (Fig.
                                 7.1-3: inset) and are associated with a low rate of recurrence and complications. The upper esophagus is ex-
                                 posed by retracting the sternocleidomastoid muscle and carotid sheath laterally and the thyroid gland medially.
                                 The diverticulum is located in the prevertebral space. Care is taken not to injure the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
                                 Following excision of the diverticulum, a cricopharyngeal myotomy may be performed, starting on the upper
                                 esophagus and extending across the cricopharyngeal muscle near the neck of the diverticulum, and on to the
                                 inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle.
                                Recent emphasis has been placed on endoscopic treatment of Zenker’s diverticulum (Dohlman procedure). In this
                                procedure, a modified laryngoscope and endoscopic stapler are used to divide the common wall between diverticu-
                                lum and true esophageal lumen. This is advantageous because it does not require an incision, and it does not injure
                                the recurrent laryngeal nerve. It has similar results to open procedures.

===== PAGE 485 =====
Esophageal Diverticulectomy        485

                               Figure 7.1-3. Zenker’s diverticulum approached through a left cervical incision
                               (inset). A: The diverticulum is grasped, and a cricopharyngeal myotomy is extended

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                               onto the upper esophagus. B: The base of the diverticulum is stapled, and the
                               diverticulum is resected. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW, LoCicero
                               J III, Ponn RB: General Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                               Philadelphia: 2000.)

                   Midesophageal diverticula, by definition, occur in the middle 3rd of the esophagus. These “true” diverticula typi-
                   cally arise in the setting of mediastinal granulomatous disease whereby a fibrotic reaction around inflamed mediastinal
                   lymph nodes results in traction on the muscular wall of the esophagus. Diverticula usually arise within 4–5 cm of the
                   carina and comprise an estimated 10–17% of all esophageal diverticula. Most midesophageal diverticula are asymp-
                   tomatic and do not require surgical intervention. In cases that require intervention because of either regurgitation or
                   development of an esophagobronchial fistula, the approach is through a right thoracotomy with excision of the inflam-
                   matory mass. Primary closure of the fistula and the interposition of viable tissue, such as muscle, should be performed.
                   Epiphrenic diverticula arise in the distal 10 cm of the esophagus and are thought to be related to an underlying
                   esophageal motility disorder. These false diverticula are most commonly present in the 6th decade. The clinical
                   presentation is variable; most patients have symptoms related to their underlying dysmotility syndrome: dysphagia,
                    chest pain, or regurgitation. Most patients with epiphrenic diverticula are asymptomatic, and there appears to be
                    no relation between size of the diverticulum and symptoms. Surgery for epiphrenic diverticula typically consists of
                    diverticulectomy with myotomy either through a left thoracotomy (Fig. 7.1-4) or via laparoscopy. With the trans-
                    thoracic approach, a low, left thoracotomy is used, the esophagus is mobilized and encircled, and the diverticulum
                    is mobilized and excised. A myotomy should be performed opposite the diverticulectomy and should extend proxi-
                    mally above the diverticulum and distally onto the stomach. Because there is, by definition, an underlying motility
                    disorder, the myotomy should be carried onto the stomach, and a nonobstructing fundoplication may be added to
                    prevent significant postoperative reflux.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Laparoscopic diverticulectomy and myotomy has gained increasing accep-
                   tance, and reported outcomes are similar to those obtained with the open procedure. The surgical approach is similar
                   to that used during laparoscopic fundoplication (see p. 585). Dissection of the diverticula may be facilitated by the
                   passage of a bougie or video endoscope. After the diverticulum is amputated using an endoscopic stapler, a myotomy
                   is performed opposite the diverticula, and a partial fundoplication is fashioned.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Esophageal diverticulum

===== PAGE 486 =====
General Surgery   486   c h a p t e r 7.1    Esophageal Surgery

                                            Figure 7.1-4. Epiphrenic diverticulum. Through a left thoracotomy, the diverticulum
                                            is mobilized and resected. A contralateral myotomy is then created and extended
                                            distally to the stomach to eliminate any functional obstruction secondary to the
                                            preexistent dysmotility. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW, LoCicero J
                                            III, Ponn RB: General Thoracic Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                            Philadelphia: 2000.)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Hypopharyngeal                                 Epiphrenic

                                 Position                Supine                                         Right lateral decubitus

                                 Incision                Left, right cervical, endoscopic               Left thoracotomy

                                 Special                 None                                           Chest retractor
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Care not to injure recurrent laryngeal nerve   10 cm myotomy
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop                       ⇐

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h                                          ⇐

                                 Closing                 Inspect for perforation                        ⇐
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     50–100 mL                                      100–200 mL

                                 Postop care             PACU → ward                                    ICU × 1–2 d

===== PAGE 487 =====
Management of Esophageal Perforation              487

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                              Hypopharyngeal                                     Epiphrenic

                     Mortality                < 1%                                               ⇐

                     Morbidity                Recurrent nerve paralysis: < 5%                    Atelectasis: 5–10%
                                              Temporary phonetic problems: < 5%                  Esophageal perforation: < 2%
                                              Esophageal stricture: < 3%                         < 2%
                                              Esophageal fistula: < 2%

                     Pain score               6–7 (< 2 with endoscopic)                          7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                35–90 yr (50% of patients > 70 yr)

                     Male:Female              2:1

                     Incidence                Uncommon

                     Etiology                 Uncoordinated cricoesophageal muscle and lower esophageal sphincter; weakness of esopha-
                                              geal wall.

                     Associated               Cachexia (25–30%); hiatus hernia with or without reflux (25%); chronic pulmonary infection
                       conditions             (15–20%); aspiration (30–40%)

                                                                                                                                                              General Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Esophageal Surgery following Esophagectomy, p. 494.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bock JM, Van Daele DJ, Gupta N, et al: Management of Zenker’s diverticulum in the endoscopic age: current practice patterns.
                        Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2001; 120:796.
                     2. Dzeletovic I, Ekborn DC, Baron TH: Flexible endoscopic and surgical management of Zenkar’s diverticulum. Expert Rev
                        Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012; 6(4):449–65.
                     3. Ferreira LE, Simmons DT, Bain TH: Zenker’s diverticula: pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and flexible endoscopic
                        management. Dis Esophagus 2008; 21:1–8.

                   MANAGEMENT OF ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Esophageal perforation may be spontaneous, instrumental (iatrogenic), traumatic, or 2° intrinsic
                   esophageal disease. Spontaneous (or emetogenic) perforation most commonly occurs in the lower 3rd of the
                   esophagus. Instrumental perforations may occur at any level, but are most common just above the cardia and in the
                   cervical esophagus. The level of traumatic perforation depends on the location of the penetrating wound. Symptoms
                   of esophageal perforation at the cricopharyngeal sphincter include neck pain, fever, and crepitations in the substernal
                   and neck areas. Perforation in the mediastinum may result in hydropneumothorax, mediastinitis, fever, and sub-
                   sternal pain. Cervical perforations are managed with antibiotics and drainage in the cervical area. Therapy for intra-
                   thoracic perforation generally requires emergent operation. Surgical options include primary repair, drainage and
                   diversion, placement of temporary covered stents, and esophageal resection. The optimal choice depends on the
                   nature and duration of the perforation as well as the clinical condition of the patient. Spontaneous perforations are
                   often amenable to primary repair—either through the abdomen or the left chest. Patients suffering from iatrogenic
                   perforation incurred during dilation of a malignant, or nondilatable, stricture may require urgent esophagectomy.

===== PAGE 488 =====
488   c h a p t e r 7.1     Esophageal Surgery

                                Patients with delayed recognition of a perforation may be hemodynamically unstable and may only tolerate drainage
                                and diversion (generally through a cervical esophagostomy).
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Cervical or right thoracic drainage is indicated when the perforation occurs
                                in the neck or high in the mediastinum.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Esophageal perforation

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            Left Thoracotomy                                      Cervical or Thoracic Drainage

                                 Position                   Right lateral decubitus                               Supine or right lateral decubitus

                                 Incision                   Left thoracotomy                                      Cervical or right chest

                                 Antibiotics                Zosyn (piperacillin & tazobactom) 3.375 g iv          ⇐
                                                            q6h

                                 VTE prophylaxis            Heparin 5,000 units sq                                ⇐

                                 Surgical time              2–4 h                                                 1h

                                 Closing                    Chest drain                                           Cervical or thoracic drain
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                        100–200 mL                                            50–100 mL
        General Surgery

                                 Postop care                Chest tube to suction; PACU → ward                    ⇐

                                 Mortality                  5–10%                                                 2–5%

                                 Morbidity                  Pneumonia: 5–10%                                      —
                                                            Esophageal leak: 2–5%                                 10%
                                                            Pericarditis: 1–3%                                    —

                                 Pain score                 8–10                                                  8–10

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                  Variable: 20–80 yr

                                 Male:Female                1:1

                                 Incidence                  1 in 8000 admissions

                                 Etiology                   Instrumental (endoscopy, dilatation, intubation); traumatic (penetrating, foreign body, caustic
                                                            agents); intrinsic disease (carcinoma, peptic ulceration); spontaneous

                                 Associated                 Esophageal stricture (75%); cancer (25%)
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Esophageal Surgery following Esophagectomy, p. 494.
                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Fell SC: Esophageal perforation. In: Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Esophageal Surgery. Churchill Livingstone,
                                     New York: 2002, 615–36.
                                  2. Schembre DB: Recent advantages in the use of stents for esophageal disease. Gastrointestinal Endosc Clin N Am 2010;
                                     20:103.
                                  3. Wu JT, Mattox KL, Wall MJ: Esophageal perforations: new perspectives and treatment paradigms. J Trauma 2007; 63:
                                     1173–84.

===== PAGE 489 =====
Esophagomyotomy       489

                   ESOPHAGOMYOTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Esophagomyotomy is performed for achalasia
                   and other motility disorders to facilitate esophageal emptying
                   into the stomach. Most authors recommend incising the mus-
                   cular layer of the distal esophagus and continuing down across
                   the gastroesophageal junction for at least 1 cm (Heller’s my-
                   otomy). The muscle is dissected back from the mucosa so that
                   roughly 180° is exposed (Fig. 7.1-5). The distal esophagus is
                   mobilized either from below the diaphragm or via a left tho-
                   racic approach. Care is taken not to injure the vagus nerves.
                   When approached from the abdomen, the esophagus
                   is exposed by incising the gastroesophageal ligament.
                   The distal esophagus is mobilized and pulled downward
                   to perform the myotomy. The procedure is usually done
                   endoscopically.                                                   Figure     7.1-5. Surgical anatomy for
                                                                                     esophagomyotomy. (Reproduced with permis
                   Variant procedure or approaches: The procedure usu-
                                                                                     sion from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery,
                   ally is performed through a left thoracotomy, but some sur-
                                                                                     2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)
                   geons prefer a transabdominal approach. Laparoscopic or

                                                                                                                                                General Surgery
                   thoracoscopic approaches are used to perform esophagomy-
                   otomy (see p. 588).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Achalasia; diffuse esophageal spasm; nutcracker esophagus

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Thoracic Approach               Abdominal Approach            Endoscopic Approaches

                     Position               Right lateral decubitus         Supine                        Supine

                     Incision               Left thoracotomy in 6th         Midline upper abdomen         Multiple small abdominal
                                            interspace                                                    incisions

                     Special                Chest retractor                 Denier retractor              Laparoscopic instrumentation
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 Care should be taken to         ⇐                             Legs spread apart (laparo-
                       considerations       avoid extending gastric                                       scopic approach)
                                            myotomy too far to
                                            prevent esophageal reflux.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop        ⇐                             ⇐

                     VTE prophylaxis        Heparin 5000 units sq           ⇐                             ⇐

                     Surgical time          1–2 h                           ⇐                             ⇐

                     Closing                3 for perforation. Consider     ⇐                             ⇐
                       considerations       fundoplication to prevent
                                            esophageal reflux.

                     EBL                    150–200 mL                      100–150 mL                    50 mL

                     Postop care            ICU × 1–2 d                     PACU → room                   ⇐

                     Mortality              < 0.5%                          ⇐                             ⇐

===== PAGE 490 =====
490   c h a p t e r 7.1   Esophageal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                          Thoracic Approach               Abdominal Approach               Endoscopic Approaches

                                 Morbidity                Esophagitis: ≤ 20%              ⇐                                ⇐
                                                          Transient dysphagia/reflux:     ⇐                                ⇐
                                                          5%
                                                          Esophageal leak: 1–2%           ⇐                                ⇐

                                 Pain score               7–9                             6–8                              3–4

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                30–50 yr

                                 Male:Female              1:1

                                 Incidence                0.6/100,000

                                 Etiology                 Neuromuscular disorder of unknown etiology often characterized by absence of ganglion cells of
                                                          Auerbach’s plexus.

                                 Associated               Predisposition to development of carcinoma (1–20%); pulmonary complications 2° aspiration
                                   conditions             (5–10%)
        General Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Esophageal Surgery following Esophagectomy, p. 494.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Pellegrini C, Wetters LA, Palti M, et al: Thorascopic esophagomyotomy. Ann Surg 1992; 216:29.
                                  2. Zhu ZJ, Chen LQ, Duranceau A: Long-term results of total vs. partial fundoplication after esophagomyotomy for primary
                                     esophageal motor disorders. World J Surg 2008; 32:401–7.

                                ESOPHAGOGASTRIC FUNDOPLASTY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Esophagogastric fundoplasty represents a variety of operations designed to prevent esophageal re-
                                flux by wrapping the fundus of the stomach around a 3- to 4-cm segment of the lower esophagus. This fundal wrap-
                                ping acts to reinforce the lower esophageal sphincter. Surgery may be performed transabdominally, transthoracically,
                                or laparoscopically, depending on surgeon’s preference. The most common approach is the open or laparoscopic
                                Nissen fundoplication, wherein the anterior and posterior walls of the stomach are sutured together around the
                                lower esophagus with nonabsorbable sutures (Fig. 7.1-6A). This is accomplished by incising the gastrosplenic liga-
                                ment and ligating three or four short gastric vessels. Care must be taken not to injure the spleen or vagus nerves
                                during the repair.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Modifications of the Nissen fundoplication include the Toupet procedure,
                                a posterior partial fundoplication, and the Hill procedure, in which the gastroesophageal junction is sutured to
                                the median arcuate ligament of the diaphragm or to the preaortic fascia (Fig. 7.1-6B). Another modification is the
                                Belsey Mark IV repair, in which there is a 240° semifundoplication between the stomach and esophagus, making it
                                easier for the patient to overcome the resistance of the wrap. There are proponents of each repair, although the Nis-
                                sen fundoplication remains the standard to which others are compared. The laparoscopic approach is widely used,
                                although the left transthoracic approach provides excellent exposure for either Nissen or Belsey repairs (see p. 588).
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Sliding hiatus (hiatal) hernia, paraesophageal hiatus hernia, or free reflux

===== PAGE 491 =====
Esophagogastric Fundoplasty         491

                                                                            Distal
                                                                          esophagus

                                                                                                             S mac
                                                                                                             Sto ach
                                                                                                                   h
                                                                                                             Stomach
                                                                                         Diaphragm
                                                                                         Dia
                                                                                         D aphr
                                                                                             phragm

                                               Stomach
                                               S
                                               Stomach
                                                  mac h

                                Figure 7.1-6. A: Nissen fundoplication may be performed via either the
                                transabdominal or transthoracic approach. B: Hill repair is performed through the
                                abdomen. (Reproduced with permission from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery,
                                2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Nissen (Toupet)           Laparoscopic
                                            Fundoplication            Nissen                    Hill Procedure         Belsey Mark IV

                     Position               Supine                    Supine, legs apart        ⇐                      Right lateral decubitus

                     Incision               Midline abdominal or      Laparoscopic ports        Midline abdominal      Left posterolateral
                                            laparoscopic ports                                                         thoracotomy

                     Special                #40–50 Hurst              Laparoscopic              NG tube                Chest retractor; NG
                       instrumentation      dilators; NG tube         instrumentation                                  tube

                     Unique                 Fundoplication should     CO2 insufflation                                 ⇐
                       considerations       be loose; parietal cell                                                    240°
                                            vagotomy performed                                                         semi-fundoplication
                                            if peptic ulcer disease
                                            present. Fundoplica-
                                            tion may be limited to
                                            180–280° posterior
                                            wrap (Toupet)

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv        ⇐                         ⇐                      ⇐

                     VTE prophylaxis        Heparin 5000 units        ⇐                         ⇐                      ⇐
                                            sq

                     Surgical time          1–2 h                     ⇐                         ⇐                      ⇐

                     Closing                Inspect spleen for        ⇐                         ⇐                      ⇐
                       considerations       bleeding

                     EBL                    100–150 mL                50 mL                     100–150 mL             100–200 mL

                     Postop care            PACU → ward               ⇐                         ⇐                      ICU × 1–2 d

===== PAGE 492 =====
492   c h a p t e r 7.1    Esophageal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                           Nissen (Toupet)            Laparoscopic
                                                           Fundoplication             Nissen                    Hill Procedure            Belsey Mark IV

                                 Mortality                 < 0.5%                     ⇐                         ⇐                         ⇐

                                 Morbidity                 Recurrent hernia: 20%      ⇐                         ⇐                         ⇐
                                                           Gas-bloat syndrome:        ⇐                         < 5%                      ⇐
                                                           10–20%
                                                           Temporary dysphagia:       ⇐                         5%                        2%
                                                           5–10%
                                                           Gastric fistula: < 2%      ⇐                         ⇐                         ⇐

                                 Pain score                6–8                        2–4                       7–8                       7–9

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 46–60 yr

                                 Male:Female               1:2

                                 Incidence                 Not uncommon

                                 Etiology                  Esophagogastric reflux (100%); esophageal hiatus hernia (80–90%)

                                 Associated                Diverticulosis of colon (30–35%); cholelithiasis (25–30%)
        General Surgery

                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Esophageal Surgery following Esophagectomy, p. 494.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Belsey R: Mark IV repair of hiatal hernia by the transthoracic approach. World J Surg 1977; 1(4):475–81.
                                  2. Cuschieri A: Laparoscopic antireflux surgery and repair of hiatal hernia. World J Surg 1993; 17(1):40–5.
                                  3. Weber C, Davis CS, Shankaran V, et al: Hiatal hernias: a review of the pathophysiologic theories and implication for research.
                                     Surg Endosc 2011; 25(10):3149–53.

                                ESOPHAGECTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Esophagectomy is most commonly performed for malignant disease of the middle and lower 3rd of the
                                esophagus and gastric cardia. This procedure also may be indicated for intractable benign stricture, Barrett’s esopha-
                                gus with in situ multifocal adenocarcinoma and end-stage achalasia. There are several surgical options for esophageal
                                resection, including the Ivor Lewis approach, which involves a laparotomy and right thoracotomy; the transhiatal
                                approach, whereby the esophagus is mobilized through abdominal and neck incisions, and the left thoracoabdominal
                                approach (Fig. 7.1-7). Although there are advantages and disadvantages to each, the final result is to use a portion of
                                the stomach to replace the esophagus. In all approaches, the stomach is mobilized while preserving its blood supply
                                from the right gastroepiploic and gastric arteries. The stomach is then transposed into the chest, and a gastroesopha-
                                geal anastomosis is fashioned either in the chest (Ivor Lewis and left chest approaches) or in the neck (transhiatal
                                approach). To avoid delayed gastric emptying, a pyloroplasty or pyloromyotomy is often added, as is placement of a
                                temporary jejunal feeding tube. Regardless of the surgical technique, patients with larger or locally advanced tumors
                                may have received preoperative chemotherapy or radiation. In these patients, the combination of less distinct tissue
                                planes and radiation-induced inflammation tends to lead to increased bleeding and/or increased insensible fluid losses.

===== PAGE 493 =====
Esophagectomy     493

                   The previously mentioned variants of esophagectomy all involve use of the stomach as an esophageal replacement.
                   When the stomach is not available (as with prior resection or caustic injury), the colon can be used as an esophageal
                   substitute. Both the left and right colon can be used, with the vascular supply to the grafts based on either the ascend-
                   ing branch of the left colic artery or the right colic artery. Colon interpositions typically have higher complication
                   rates than esophagectomies using gastric conduits. Supercharged jejunum has also been used with excellent success.
                   Supercharged means an arterial and venous anastomosis is also made in the neck.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of esophagus or gastroesophageal junction; Barrett’s esophagus; benign strictures

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                          Total
                                                                       Transhiatal                                        Esophagectomy +
                                             Ivor Lewis                Esophagectomy            Thoracoabdominal          Colonic Interposition

                     Position                Supine and left lateral   Supine                   Right lateral decubitus   Supine and right
                                             decubitus                                                                    lateral decubitus

                     Incision                Midline abdominal +       Cervical and midline     Thoracoabdominal          Midline + right tho-
                                             right chest and/or cer-   abdominal                across costal margin      racic and cervical
                                             vical incisions                                    (see Fig. 7.1-8)

                     Unique                  DLT                       None                     DLT                       ⇐
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 2 g iv preop    ⇐                        ⇐                         ⇐

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                     VTE prophylaxis         Heparin 5000 units        ⇐                        ⇐                         ⇐
                                             sq

                     Surgical time           3–4 h                     4–5 h                    3–4 h                     5–6 h

                     Closing                 Lung reexpansion          Pneumothorax             Lung reexpansion          Vascular integrity of
                       considerations                                                                                     colonic interposition

                     EBL                     300–800 mL                ⇐                        ⇐                         ⇐

                     Postop care             ICU × 1–2 d               ⇐                        ⇐                         ICU × 2–3 d

                     Mortality               5–10%                     ⇐                        ⇐                         10%

                     Morbidity               Respiratory complica-     ⇐                        ⇐                         ⇐
                                             tions: 15–20%
                                             Anastomotic leakage:      5–10%                    < 5%                      10%
                                             < 5%
                                             Anastomotic stricture:    ⇐                        ⇐                         10%
                                             < 5%
                                             Wound infection: < 5%     ⇐                        ⇐                         ⇐

                     Pain score              7–9                       6–8                      7–9                       7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               4–80 yr

                     Male:Female             2:1 for carcinoma

                     Incidence               1–2% of malignant disease

                     Etiology                Alcohol and tobacco; dietary factors—hot spicy foods; lye burns

                     Associated              Barrett’s esophagus; hiatus hernia; reflux esophagitis; radiation esophagitis; caustic burns
                       conditions

===== PAGE 494 =====
494   c h a p t e r 7.1   Esophageal Surgery

                                        A                                  B                                             C

                                                                                                             Esophagus

                                                                                                                Aorta

                                                                            Tumor
        General Surgery

                                            Figure 7.1-7. Standard thoracoabdominal esophagosgastrectomy for carcinomas of
                                            the distal esophagus and cardia. A: Thoracoabdominal incision. B: Tissue to be resected
                                            (darker area). C: Completed reconstruction after intrathoracic esophagogastric
                                            anastomosis and either pyloromyotomy or pyloroplasty to prevent postvagotomy
                                            pylorospasm. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland, MW,
                                            Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott
                                            Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001).

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Barzin A, Norton JA, Whyte R, Lee GK: Supercharged jejunum flap for total esophageal reconstruction: single surgeon 3-year
                                     experience and outcome analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011; 127:173.
                                  2. Dantoc MM, Cox MR, Eslick GD: Does minimally invasive esophagectomy (MIE) provide for comparable oncologic outcomes
                                     to open techniques? A systematic review. J Gastrointest Surg 2012; 16(3):486–94.
                                  3. Raymond D: Complications of esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1299–313.
                                  4. Sanghera SS, Nurkin SJ, Demmy TL: Quality of life after an esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1315–35.
                                  5. Stiles BM, Altorki NK: Traditional techniques of esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1249–63.
                                  6. Sudarshan M, Ferri L: A critical review of minimally invasive esophagectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 2012;
                                     22(4):310–8.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
                                (Procedures covered: esophagostomy; esophageal diverticulectomy; closure of esophageal perforation; esoph-
                                agomyotomy; esophagogastric fundoplasty; esophagectomy; colonic interposition)

                                Patients presenting for esophageal surgery typically are those with carcinoma, motility disorders, strictures, hiatal
                                hernia, reflux esophagitis, diverticula, and perforation. Patients tend to be elderly, with a history of tobacco abuse

===== PAGE 495 =====
Esophagectomy        495

                                          A
                                                                                                          Esophagus

                                                                                                          Aorta

                                                                        B
                                                                                                Stomach

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                               Figure 7.1-8. Standard thoracoabdominal esophagogastrectomy for tumors of the upper
                               and middle 3rd of the thoracic esophagus. A: Either a continuous thoracoabdominal
                               incision or separate thoracic and abdominal incisions are used. B: Portion of esophagus
                               to be resected (darker area). C: Completed reconstruction with high intrathoracic
                               esophagogastric anastomosis and gastric drainage procedure. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland, MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific
                               Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   and alcohol consumption, and may have associated cardiopulmonary disease. Obesity and ischemic heart disease
                   are increasingly frequent comorbid conditions. Esophageal disorders such as hiatal hernia, Barrett’s esophagus, and
                   carcinoma with incomplete obstruction predispose the patient to recurrent aspiration pneumonitis from intermit-
                   tent reflux of gastric contents. Patients with esophageal diverticula, stricture, achalasia, and carcinoma with obstruc-
                   tion may present with retained food and oral secretions. Therefore, patients may need to be considered nonfasted.
                   Minimally invasive techniques for esophagectomy (with laparoscopy and thoracoscopy) have potential benefits of
                   decreased tissue injury, and hence pain, with earlier recovery and reduced hospital stay. These advantages are not
                   yet clearly established. The anesthetic considerations are broadly similar with the additional issues that accompany
                   laparoscopic and thoracoscopic (VATS) procedures.

                         PREOPERATIVE

                    Respiratory               Many patients with esophageal cancer have a long history of smoking resulting in COPD.
                                              Mediastinal lymphadenopathy and tumors of the upper esophagus may lead to tracheal/
                                              bronchial compression or erosion that may be revealed by CT and bronchoscopy. A history
                                              of gastric reflux and recurrent aspiration pneumonia → ↓ pulmonary reserve and ↑ risk of re-
                                              gurgitation/aspiration during anesthetic induction. (See Premedication, below.) If thoracoto-
                                              my is a part of the procedure, the patient should be evaluated to ensure that OLV will be tol-
                                              erated (see below). Determine if patient has been exposed to radiation and chemotherapeutic

===== PAGE 496 =====
496   c h a p t e r 7.1   Esophageal Surgery

                                Respiratory               agents that may cause pulmonary fibrosis. Some agents, such as Bleomycin, may cause pul-
                                  (cont’d)                monary toxicity (above a total dose of 300 U) that is worsened by high concentrations of O2,
                                                          which should be avoided during the perioperative period.
                                                          Tests: Consider PFTs (FEV1, FVC, DLCO), ABG, and flow-volume loops, if indicated by
                                                          H&P. They can be helpful in predicting the likelihood of perioperative pulmonary compli-
                                                          cations and the possible need for postoperative ventilatory support. Patients with baseline
                                                          hypoxemia/hypercarbia on room air have a greater likelihood of postop complications and
                                                          ventilatory insufficiency. Severe restrictive or obstructive lung disease also will increase
                                                          the chance of pulmonary morbidity in the periop period. A-P, lateral CXR (if suggestive of
                                                          tracheal compression obtain MRI/CT).

                                Cardiovascular            Elderly patients may have coexisting CAD. In the setting of a recent angioplasty/stent, con-
                                                          tinued management with antiplatelet agents (clopidogrel) may preclude the use of epidural
                                                          techniques. Patients may be hypovolemic and malnourished from dysphagia or anorexia.
                                                          Preop chemotherapy treatment with agents such as doxorubicin may cause acute dysrhyth-
                                                          mias and chronic cardiomyopathy (seen increasingly in patients if total dose is > 550 mg/m2).
                                                           Some esophageal tumors are related to alcohol consumption and chronic abuse may
                                                          produce a toxic cardiomyopathy. Preop optimization of cardiac status is important.
                                                           Tests: ECG to r/o dysrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, or prior MI. ECHO or dobuta-
                                                           mine stress ECHO will provide important functional information about the heart at rest
                                                           or under stress, respectively. Reversible ischemia and significant cardiomyopathy should
                                                           prompt further cardiac consultation.

                                Hematologic               Tests: CBC with differential.
        General Surgery

                                Laboratory                PT & PTT, basic metabolic profile and tests as indicated from H&P.

                                Premedication             Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Consider H2-antagonists (e.g., ranitidine 50 mg iv),
                                                           etoclopramide (10 mg iv 1 h preop), and Na citrate (30 mL po 10 min preop) in patients
                                                          m
                                                          with reflux and partial obstruction. Patients with esophageal motility disorders, strictures/
                                                          tumors with complete obstruction may not tolerate oral antacids.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA (with or without epidural for intraop/postop analgesia). If the patient is clinically
                                hypovolemic, restore intravascular volume before epidural placement and induction of GA. Surgeries involving only
                                a cervical or endoscopic approach typically do not require epidural analgesia. If epidural analgesia is planned, place-
                                ment and testing of the catheter before anesthetic induction is recommended. This is accomplished by injecting
                                5–7 mL of 1–2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine via the epidural catheter and eliciting a segmental block. If a
                                thoracic or thoracoabdominal approach is performed, placement of a DLT is indicated to provide OLV for optimal
                                surgical conditions. (For additional discussion of DLT placement and OLV, see Anesthetic Considerations in Lobec-
                                tomy, Pneumonectomy in Thoracic Surgery, p. 285.)

                                Induction                 Patients with esophageal disease are often at risk for pulmonary aspiration; therefore, the
                                                          trachea should be intubated after rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure. In cases
                                                          with a difficult airway needing a DLT, placement of a single lumen tube should be accom-
                                                          plished (a) with the aid of a bougie, (b) via an LMA, or (c) with FOB. The single lumen tube
                                                          is then changed to a DLT using a tube exchange catheter.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3), with or without N2O (for OLV). Alternatively, a combined
                                                          technique may be used. A local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine or
                                                          0.25% bupivacaine) can be infused or injected into a thoracic (3–5 mL) or lumbar (5–10 mL)
                                                          epidural catheter to provide both anesthesia and optimal surgical conditions (contracted
                                                          bowel and profound muscle relaxation). Continuous infusion of local anesthetic generally
                                                          provides better hemodynamic stability than hourly bolus injections. To enhance the effect
                                                          of epidural analgesia, a loading dose of opiates (e.g., hydromorphone 0.4–1 mg [thoracic]
                                                          or 1–1.5 mg [lumbar]) can be administered early during the surgery and at least 1 h be-
                                                          fore conclusion of the case. Esophagectomy procedures can cause significant third-space

===== PAGE 497 =====
Esophagectomy         497

                    Maintenance        losses; thus, maintenance of euvolemia with close monitoring of BP and UO. Esophageal
                      (cont’d)         procedures involving transient compression of the myocardium (i.e., thoracic approach
                                       for esophagomyotomy or esophagectomy) can induce dysrhythmias and/or ↓ BP. Moni-
                                       toring of BP with an arterial catheter is recommended. When OLV is necessary there can
                                       be ventilation-induced lung injury, oxygen toxicity, atelectasis and ischemia-reperfusion
                                       injury. The use of PEEP, lower tidal volumes and low ventilatory pressures may be protec-
                                       tive ventilator strategies. The goals of fluid management are (1) optimize the tissue blood
                                       flow and oxygen delivery and (2) avoid excessive fluid administration, which could lead to
                                       anastomotic edema with impaired wound healing and pulmonary edema with increased
                                       cardiopulmonary morbidity. A balance of colloid + crystalloid and blood products when
                                       necessary help achieve this goal directed fluid therapy.

                    Emergence          Generally, tracheal extubation should be anticipated at the end of the case. The decision
                                       to keep the patient intubated postop depends on cardiopulmonary status and the site and
                                       extent of the surgical procedure. Patients with significant intraop fluid shift may d
                                                                                                                            evelop
                                       airway edema that can → airway obstruction if extubated prematurely. This may also
                                       occur in operations involving high anastomoses in the neck. For those who may require
                                       prolonged postop ventilation, the DLT should be exchanged to a single-lumen ETT before
                                       transport to ICU. The use of an airway exchange catheter is safe, and direct laryngoscopy
                                       during the exchange prevents inadvertent seepage of blood or silent aspiration. Weaning
                                       from mechanical ventilation should begin when the patient is awake and cooperative, able to
                                       protect the airway, hemodynamically stable, and has adequate return of pulmonary function
                                       (as measured by VC > = 10 mL/kg; MIF of > 30 cmH2O; rapid, shallow breathing index of

                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                                       ≤ 100 [RR÷TV(L)]; respiratory rate < 25; and ABG that demonstrates adequate gas exchange).

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 14–16 ga × l–2                       Plt, FFP, and cryoprecipitate (if required) should be
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                     administered according to lab tests (Plt count, PT,
                                       Warm fluids                              PTT, DIC screen, thromboelastography [TEG]).
                                       Consider T&C for 2–4 U PRBC              Maintain euvolemia based on estimates of blood loss,
                                                                                fluid shifts, fluids administered, and HR, BP, UO, base
                                                                                deficit, and invasive monitoring when employed.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (p. B-1)               CVP cannulation site determined by surgical ap-
                                       Urinary catheter                         proach. Attempt to prevent hypothermia during
                                       ± Arterial line                          long operations. Consider forced-air warmer, heat-
                                       ± CVP                                    ed humidifier, warming blanket, warming the OR,
                                                                                keeping patient covered until ready for prep, etc.

                    Positioning        If lateral decubitus position, use ax-   Problems that can arise include brachial plexus in-
                                       illary roll, airplane arm holder         juries, damage to soft tissues, ears, eyes, genitals
                                       3 pressure points, including ears,       from malpositioning. Check down eye at frequent
                                       eyes, and genitals                       intervals.
                                       3 radial pulses to ensure correct        Placing the oximeter probe on the down arm may
                                       placement of axillary roll (if mis-      assist in monitoring adequacy of perfusion.
                                       placed, will compromise distal
                                       pulses)

                    Complications      Hypoxemia                                Hypoxemia during OLV most commonly results
                                                                                from luminal obstruction (by blood or pulmonary
                                                                                secretions) of the DLT; ↑ shunting, or malposi-
                                                                                tion of DLT, which can move during surgical ma-
                                                                                nipulation. Rx: suction DLT and 3 position; PEEP
                                                                                to ventilated lung (but may ↑ shunting); CPAP to
                                                                                nonventilated lung; return to double-lung ventila-
                                                                                tion. Temporary clamping of the PA (or inflate the
                                                                                balloon of the PA catheter, if available) may be nec-
                                                                                essary to improve shunting and oxygenation.
                                       Hypercarbia                              Ensure adequate TV and RR.
                                       Dysrhythmia                              3 for mechanical compression of heart or great ves-
                                                                                sels. Check K+.

===== PAGE 498 =====
498   c h a p t e r 7.1    Esophageal Surgery

                                Complications               Hypotension                                 3 volume status and cardiac function. Consider
                                  (cont’d)                                                              neosynephrine for BP support if ↓ BP 2° epidural
                                                                                                        anesthetic. Avoid epidural bolus dosing (↓ BP).
                                                                                                        Maintaining an adequate BP is important for ad-
                                                                                                        equate perfusion and hence integrity of a newly
                                                                                                        formed anastomosis.
                                                            VTE Prophylaxis                             See Appendix B

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               Aspiration                                  For patients at risk for atelectasis or aspiration, recover
                                                            Atelectasis                                 in the 45° head up or Fowler position (semisitting)
                                                            Hemorrhage                                  For hemorrhage, 3 coags; replace factors as necessary.
                                                            Pneumothorax                                Dx for pneumothorax and hemothorax: wheezing,
                                                            Hemothorax                                  coughing, dyspnea, ↓ PO2, ↓ PCO2. Confirm by
                                                                                                        CXR. Rx: chest tube drainage as necessary. In emer-
                                                                                                        gency (e.g., tension pneumothorax), use needle as-
                                                                                                        piration. Supportive Rx: O2, vasopressors, volume,
                                                                                                        ± ETT and IPPV.
                                                            Hypoxemia                                   For hypoxemia and hypoventilation; Rx: adequate
                                                            Hypoventilation                             analgesia, minimize sedation, supplemental O2,
        General Surgery

                                                                                                        may require IPPV.
                                                            Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury            For laryngeal nerve injury, Dx: indirect visualiza-
                                                                                                        tion of vocal cords; patient usually will be hoarse.
                                                            Esophageal anastomotic leak                 Surgical repair Rx for esophageal anastomotic leak.
                                                            VTE prophylaxis                             Esophageal cancer, like other cancers, predisposes
                                                                                                        patients to VTE with ↑ risk following the commonly
                                                                                                        used chemotherapeutic agents Cisplatin and 5-FU.
                                                                                                        Treat underlying cause and correct electrolyte ab-
                                                            SVT/AFib                                    normalities. Adenosine (6 mg iv, push and repeat
                                                                                                        to 12 mg iv) may be used for SVT. Most postop
                                                                                                        SVTs are 2° catecholamine surge. AFib may resolve
                                                                                                        spontaneously. Hemodynamically unstable patients
                                                                                                        will require cardioversion. β-blockers, amiodarone,
                                                                                                        Ca++ channel blockers, and overdrive cardiac pac-
                                                                                                        ing are effective in patients with stable AFib.

                                Pain                        Lumbar-thoracic epidural analge-            Patient should recover in ICU or hospital ward that
                                  management                sia: hydromorphone (0.5–1.5 mg              is accustomed to treating side effects of epidural
                                                            load, 0.1–0.3 mg/h infusion) + local        opiates (e.g., respiratory depression, hypotension,
                                                            anesthetic PCEA (p. C-4).                   breakthrough pain, nausea, pruritus)
                                                            PCA                                         When an epidural cannot be used, a PCA with an
                                                                                                        opiate such as fentanyl or morphine/hydromor-
                                                                                                        phone may be used for pain control.
                                                            NSAID                                       Ketorolac is helpful as adjuvant therapy for postop
                                                                                                        pain management.

                                Tests                       CBC, basic metabolic profile,
                                                            ABG
                                                            CXR (r/o pneumothorax, atelectasis).

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Al-Rawi OY, Pennefather SH, Page RD, et al: The effect of thoracic epidural bupivacaine and an intravenous adrenalin infusion
                                     on gastric tube blood flow during esophagectomy. Anesth Analg 2008; 106:884–7.
                                  2. Cohen E, Neustein SM, Eisenkraft JB: Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Barash, PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK eds. Clinical
                                     Anesthesia, 5th edition. JB Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 813–55.

===== PAGE 499 =====
Esophagectomy        499

                     3. Hashimi S, Smith M: Medical evaluation of patients preparing for an esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am. 2012; 92(5):
                        1127–33.
                     4. Jaeger JM, Collins SR, Blank RS: Anesthetic management for esophageal resection. Anesthesiology Clin 2012; 30:731–47.
                     5. Nagawa H, Kobori O, Muto T: Prediction of pulmonary complications after transthoracic oesophagectomy. Br J Surg 1994;
                        81(6):860–2.
                     6. Ng JM: Update on anesthetic management for esophagectomy. Curr Opin Anesthesiol 2011; 24:37–44.
                     7. Nichols FC, Allen MS, Deschamps C, et al: Ivor Lewis Esophagogastrectomy. Surg Clin N Am 2005; 85: 583–92.
                     8. Pennefather SH: Anesthesia for oesophagectomy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007; 20:15–20.
                     9. Raymond D: Complications of esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1299–313.
                    10. Sanghera SS, Nurkin SJ, Demmy TL: Quality of life after an esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1315–35.
                    11. Slinger PD, Hickey DR: The interaction between applied PEEP and auto-PEEP during one-lung ventilation. J Cardiothorac
                        Vasc Anesth 1998; 12(2):133–6.
                    12. Smetana GW: Preoperative pulmonary evaluation. N Eng J Med 1999; 340(1):937–44.
                    13. Stiles BM, Altorki NK: Traditional techniques of esophagectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2012; 92(5):1249–63.

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery

===== PAGE 500 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.2 Stomach Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Dan Eisenberg, MD, MS
                                            Myriam J. Curet, MD, FACS (Open operations for morbid obesity)
                                            Sherry M. Wren, MD
                                            Maureen M. Tedesco, MD

                                            anesthesiologists
                                            Kevin A. Malott, MD
                                            Jay B. Brodsky, MD (Open operations for morbid obesity)
                                            Jerry Ingrande, MD

===== PAGE 502 =====
GASTRIC RESECTIONS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATION
                                Description: Total or partial gastrectomy is performed most commonly for gastric cancers (adenocarcinomas or
                                gastrointestinal stromal tumors [GIST]) and will include omentectomy, lymph node dissection, and occasionally
                                resection of adjacent organs such as the spleen or colon, depending on the pathology, location, and extent of the
                                tumor. Historically there have been other indications for gastrectomy such as ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syn-
                                drome, and uncontrollable hemorrhagic gastritis, but these operations are rarely if ever performed for those indica-
                                tions in current surgical practice. Rarely patients who suffer from severe and uncontrollable gastroparesis postgastric
                                surgery may require total gastrectomy.
                                In a gastric resection, the abdomen is entered through an upper midline incision, and the lateral segment of the
                                left lobe of the liver is retracted anteriorly and to the patient’s right, exposing the esophagogastric junction. The
                                omentum is taken off of the colon and left attached to the greater curvature of the stomach. The spleen may be
                                removed if involved by tumor or if an unplanned splenic injury occurs. The vessels to the stomach are individually
                                ligated and divided. The short gastric vessels high on the greater curvature are difficult to reach and are a source
                                of potential blood loss. This is also the most likely time that a splenic injury may occur by traction or tearing of the
                                capsule while exposing the short gastric arteries. Currently most surgeons are using various devices to ligate the
                                arteries, and these occasionally have a technical failure, which can result in blood loss. In the lesser sac, the left
                                gastric artery as it branches from the celiac axis and vein needs to be divided and can be another point of potential
                                unexpected blood loss. A total gastrectomy is performed for more proximal cancers and a partial resection for distal
        General Surgery

                                cancers. In all cases of gastric cancer, the antrum and pylorus are resected, leaving a duodenal stump and requiring
                                gastroenterostomy to restore intestinal continuity. One area of potential complication when the stomach is
                                 resected is the accidental stapling of the gastric tube, which remains undetected until too late. To prevent this, the
                                  tube should be pulled back well into the esophagus, preferably with manual confirmation by the surgeon that the
                                  tube is no longer present in the stomach.
                                After completion of the gastric resection, reestablishment of intestinal continuity is performed. In the case of a
                                total gastrectomy, a Roux limb of jejunum will be brought up to the distal esophagus; in partial gastrectomies a
                                Roux limb or loop of jejunum (Billroth II) is connected to the remnant stomach. With a Roux limb the jejunum
                                is divided just beyond the ligament of Treitz, and the distal end is brought up through a hole in the mesentery of
                                the colon and anastomosed to the esophagus or stomach. Intestinal continuity is established by anastomosing the
                                biliary pancreatic limb of the proximal jejunum to the Roux limb of jejunum, approximately 60 cm distal to the
                                anastomosis with the esophagus. A drain is then placed near the closed end of the duodenum. The anastomosis
                                can either be stapled or hand sewn depending on the preference of the surgeon. At completion of the anastomo-
                                sis a NG tube can be advanced across the proximal anastomosis, and the abdomen is irrigated. A number of sur-
                                geons will then place a feeding jejunostomy tube into the jejunum, which adds a few minutes to the procedure
                                prior to fascial closure. Total gastrectomy traditionally has been associated with a morbidity and mortality out
                                of proportion to the operation’s apparent magnitude. This is most likely a consequence of the patient’s underly-
                                ing condition, which often includes advanced malignancy and, almost invariably, some degree of malnutrition.
                                Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant concern in these patients because of their increased hyper-
                                coagulable state from the cancer and an operation of greater than 1 h in duration. Patients undergoing gastric
                                resection should receive sequential compression devices on the lower extremities and subcutaneous heparin
                                thromboprophylaxis.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Occasionally a gastric cancer can have extensive local involvement of ad-
                                jacent organs requiring an en bloc resection of the stomach in addition to the colon, spleen, or pancreas. For
                                certain distal gastric cancers a combined gastric resection with a Whipple procedure (pancreaticoduodenectomy)
                                may be necessary. The need for en bloc resection of the stomach in combination with other organs increases the
                                complexity of the surgery, risk of blood loss, and postoperative morbidity and mortality. In general, exposure for
                                a partial gastrectomy is similar to, but less extensive than, that required for a total gastrectomy. The same cancer
                                principles are followed for either a partial or total resection including > 5 cm proximal margin, lymphadenectomy,
                                and omentectomy. A partial gastrectomy is a simpler resection. The blood supply to the distal stomach is divided,
                                and the duodenum is divided just beyond the pylorus. The body of the stomach is divided with a stapler (care should
                                be taken to not staple the gastric tube) at a level appropriate for the pathology. Reconstruction after resection may
                                be either to the duodenum (Billroth I), loop of jejunum (Billroth II; Fig. 7.2-1), or a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum.

                          502

===== PAGE 503 =====
Gastric Resections      503

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                               Figure 7.2-1. Anatomy of duodenostomy (Billroth I) and gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II).
                               (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative
                               Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                   The anastomoses may be stapled or sewn; then the abdomen is closed. Like many operations, gastric resections are
                   increasingly performed using minimally invasive techniques. The laparoscopic approach has the advantages of
                   diminished postoperative pain and quicker recovery, but longer operative time requires a pneumoperitoneum and
                   reverse Trendelenburg positioning.
                   Tumors (usually adenocarcinoma) of the gastroesophageal (GE) junction are increasing in frequency and may be of
                   either gastric or esophageal origin. If the tumor is associated with Barrett’s esophagus (intestinal metaplasia in the
                   esophagus, seen on endoscopy), surgery consists of either an Ivor Lewis with esophagogastric anastomosis in the

===== PAGE 504 =====
504   c h a p t e r 7.2    Stomach Surgery

                                mediastinum (combined abdominal and transthoracic approach) or transhiatal esophagectomy (see p. 492) with
                                gastroesophageal anastomosis in the neck. Bulky GE junction tumors that encompass the upper stomach will limit
                                the extent of esophageal resection if stomach pull-up is used. Postop pain can be severe, and most patients will ben-
                                efit from continuous epidural analgesia.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Total gastrectomy: gastric cancers, GIST, gastroparesis; partial gastrectomy: gastric can-
                                cer; GIST, gastric ulcers.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Total Gastrectomy                                Partial Gastrectomy

                                 Position                Supine                                           ⇐

                                 Incision                Upper midline or bilateral subcostal             Upper midline or right subcostal

                                 Special                 Upper-hand or other self-retaining costal        Upper-hand or other costal retractor
                                   instrumentation       retractor

                                 Antibiotics             1st (e.g., cefazolin) or 2nd (e.g., cefotetan)   ⇐
                                                         generation Cephalosporin iv

                                 Surgical time           2–4 h                                            1.5–2 h

                                 Closing                 Muscle relaxation required; NG suction           ⇐
                                   considerations
        General Surgery

                                 EBL                     500+ mL, with potential for significantly        100–500 mL
                                                         more

                                 Postop care             PACU → ward or ICU                               ⇐

                                 Mortality               0–22%                                            0–1.8% (may be > 10% if emergent)

                                 Morbidity               Pulmonary complications: 15%
                                                         VTE                                              ⇐
                                                         Reoperation: 0–5%
                                                         Anastomotic leak                                 ⇐
                                                         Sepsis
                                                         Wound infection                                  ⇐
                                                         Late anastomotic stricture

                                 Pain score              7–8                                              7–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Mostly > 50 years

                                 Male:Female             Male predominance

                                 Incidence               In the United States, people of Korean, Japanese, Latino, and African American race have a
                                                         higher incidence than Caucasians.

                                 Etiology                Gastric adenocarcinoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumors associated with: race, age, alcohol and
                                                         tobacco use, geographic location, and gastric ulcers.

                                 Associated              Weight loss (common); anemia (common); malnutrition (common); VTE
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Peptic Ulcer Disease, p. 509.

===== PAGE 505 =====
Gastric or Duodenal Perforation          505

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Brennan MF: Total gastrectomy for cancer. In: Fisher JE, McDermott WD, Holmes CR, et al, eds. Fischer’s Mastery of Surgery,
                        6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012, 1059–67.
                     2. Mulholland MW: Gastric neoplasms. In: Greenfield LJ, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 743–55.
                     3. Mullen JT: Subtotal gastrectomy for gastric cancer. In: Fisher JE, McDermott WD, Holmes CR, et al, eds. Fischer’s Mastery of
                        Surgery, 6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012, 1067–79.
                     4. Soybel DI, Zinner MJ: Stomach and duodenum, operative procedures. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal
                        Operations, Vol. I, 11th edition. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2006, 377–416.

                   GASTRIC OR DUODENAL PERFORATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Patients who present with gastric or duodenal perforations require emergency surgery because they
                   usually have peritonitis at presentation. The primary reason for perforations that present to the emergency room is
                   ulcer disease most likely from Helicobacter pylori infection or from NSAID use. Another cause of gastric perforation
                   is trauma, but that is not in the scope of this section. Simple closure with an omental patch, also called a Graham’s
                   patch, is the most commonly performed operation to treat a duodenal perforation. It is unusual to perform a defini-

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                   tive ulcer operation unless the patient has failed medical treatment regimens aimed at eradication of H. pylori infec-
                   tion along with proton pump inhibitors to suppress acid production.
                   Duodenal ulcers are most often caused by a benign process whereas gastric ulcer perforation without a history of
                   NSAID use is suspicious of a malignant process. For this reason, surgeons may elect to treat a perforated gastric ulcer
                   by resection. Occasionally in patients who have failed maximal medical management of their peptic ulcer disease
                   and who are not systemically ill at the time of operation, some surgeons may perform vagotomy and pyloroplasty
                   or highly selective vagotomy at the time of closure of the perforation.
                   Many surgeons routinely perform simple closure with Graham’s patch via a laparoscopic approach. This requires
                   a few trocars and a pneumoperitoneum and can be combined with abdominal washout and irrigation. If an open
                   approach is used, an upper midline incision is used. The liver is retracted superiorly and the area of perforation
                   identified. An NGT to suction minimizes ongoing leakage from the perforation and decompresses the stomach.
                   Perforation of the stomach may be handled either by resection (see Gastric Resections, p. 502) or by biopsy and
                   simple suture closure. Perforation of the duodenum is usually repaired by simple suturing of the site. Omentum
                   often is used to buttress (Graham’s patch) the area of closure of the stomach or duodenum. The abdomen is
                   irrigated and closed.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: In certain patients, nonoperative management of perforated ulcer may be
                   appropriate if they have had an upper GI study that shows an ulcer cavity and no extravasation. These patients are
                   treated with NG decompression, antibiotics, and proton pump inhibitors. In general, this has a relatively high likeli-
                   hood of success if the candidates are chosen well.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Free air under diaphragm and peritonitis, perforated peptic ulcer

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Midline or 3–4 trocars for laparoscopic approach

                     Special                  Costal retractor or laparoscopic equipment
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                   Patients usually have peritonitis.
                       considerations

===== PAGE 506 =====
506   c h a p t e r 7.2      Stomach Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Antibiotics              Cefotetan or extended spectrum PCN

                                 Surgical time            1h

                                 Closing                  Muscle relaxation required; NG suction
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                      Minimal

                                 Postop care              PACU → ward

                                 Mortality                5–15%, largely dependent on patient population

                                 Morbidity                Pneumonia
                                                          Intraabdominal abscess
                                                          Sepsis
                                                          Wound infection
                                                          Reperforation

                                 Pain score               7 for open procedure, 3 for laparoscopic

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                Adult, more common in socially disadvantaged populations
        General Surgery

                                 Male:Female              Previous heavy male predominance still exists for duodenal ulcer, but there has been a large
                                                          increase in incidence in gastric perforation in women > 65.

                                 Incidence                Fairly common. Stable incidence, but with change in distribution, especially more elderly women.

                                 Etiology                 Peptic ulcer disease (PUD); nonsteroidal medications; malignancy (if gastric)

                                 Associated               Malignancy (if perforation is gastric); nonsteroidal medications; steroid use, especially during
                                   conditions             pulse therapy; other risk factors for PUD (e.g., alcoholism, smoking)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Peptic Ulcer Disease, p. 509.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Mulholland MW: Gastroduodenal ulceration. In: Greenfield LJ, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th
                                     edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 722–35.
                                  2. Soybel DI, Zinner MJ: Ulcer complications. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, Vol. I, 11th
                                     edition. McGraw-Hill Companies, New York: 2006, 377–416.

                                OPERATIONS FOR PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                These operations are not commonly performed by surgeons, and most recently trained general surgeons have
                                never seen or performed an operation for PUD.

===== PAGE 507 =====
Operations for Peptic Ulcer Disease       507

                   Description: Gastric ulcers are commonly associated with advanced age, and patients often have other medical
                   problems, particularly cardiovascular and pulmonary. Two developments have transformed peptic ulcer disease
                   (PUD) from a common surgical problem to a rare surgical emergency (e.g., perforation and bleeding typically in
                   the chronically ill, hospitalized patient). These developments are (1) inhibitors of gastric acid secretion, and (2)
                   understanding the role of gastric overgrowth by Helicobacter pylori. The first antisecretory drugs were H2-receptor
                   antagonists (e.g., cimetidine, ranitidine); however, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) have proven to be more effective.
                   The treatment of H. pylori consists of 14 d of a PPI, plus antibiotic therapy. The medical management of PUD has
                   so revolutionized the treatment of this disease that few current graduating residents have seen or done the surgical
                   procedures described below. All operations for PUD require exposure of the upper abdomen and may be performed
                   using either an upper midline or a long, right subcostal incision. The choice of surgical procedure depends on a
                   number of considerations, including whether it is performed emergently or electively; the reason for performing the
                   procedure (common factors include bleeding, perforation, intractability, or gastric outlet obstruction); duration of
                   symptoms; condition of the patient; and experience of the surgeon.
                   Vagotomy and antrectomy (V&A): This is the most extensive of the operations performed for PUD and gener-
                   ally is reserved for healthy patients with intractable symptoms. The esophageal hiatus is exposed either by taking
                   down the lateral segment of the left lobe of the liver and reflecting it to the patient’s right or by retracting this
                   segment of the liver superiorly to gain exposure. The phrenoesophageal ligament is divided, and the anterior and
                   posterior vagus nerves (there may be more than one of each) are identified by feel. Division of all vagal trunks at
                   the esophageal hiatus is performed. The blood supply to the antrum is then divided, by dividing the right gastric
                   and gastroepiploic vessels first. The gastrohepatic ligament is divided and the stomach elevated off its attachments
                   to the transverse colon. The gastric antrum is resected, leaving the duodenum just beyond the pylorus and dividing
                   the stomach just above the junction of the body with the antrum. Reconstruction may be as a Billroth I (stomach-
                   to-duodenum) or Billroth II (stomach-to-jejunal loop; Fig. 7.2-1). The anastomosis may be stapled or hand sewn.

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                   Drains are not commonly used if a Billroth I is performed, but may be used in Billroth II because of the concern for
                   a leak from the duodenal stump.
                   Vagotomy and pyloroplasty (V&P): This is the most commonly performed operation for PUD in the United States
                   and is especially common for emergency operations. It is generally accepted to be simpler and safer to perform than
                   V&A, but not as effective at preventing recurrence of ulcer disease. The abdominal incision and exposure of the
                   hiatus to perform a vagotomy is the same as for V&A. After division of both vagal trunks (Fig. 7.2-2), a longitudinal
                   incision is made through the pylorus. The incision is then sutured together transversely, completing the pyloroplasty.
                   Parietal cell vagotomy (PCV): This operation requires more meticulous exposure of the esophageal hiatus than
                   that needed for a truncal vagotomy. The hiatus is exposed as above, and the main vagal trunks supplying the stomach
                   are identified, but not divided. The stomach is retracted downward, and it is often helpful to divide a portion of the
                   gastrocolic omentum to facilitate grasping the stomach. Nerve branches supplying the body of the stomach (Fig. 7.2-2)
                   are individually divided and ligated with fine ligatures. Because the nerve fibers run with the blood vessels to the
                   stomach, this necessarily involves division of the blood supply to the proximal lesser curvature of the stomach. This

                               Figure 7.2-2. Types of vagotomy. Heavy lines indicate where vagal trunks are cut.

===== PAGE 508 =====
508   c h a p t e r 7.2     Stomach Surgery

                                dissection is carried to the region of the “crow’s foot” of the stomach, which is preserved. By denervating only the
                                acid-producing portion of the stomach, while preserving innervation to the antrum, gastric acidity is diminished
                                without significantly impairing gastric motility or emptying. A pyloroplasty is, therefore, not necessary. The opera-
                                tion is relatively tedious compared to the other procedures and usually is performed electively or, rarely, urgently if
                                there is a recent perforation and minimal soilage. It can be recommended only for duodenal ulcer disease, not gastric
                                ulcers. Side effects of this operation are generally less than with other ulcer operations.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Laparoscopic approaches to the treatment of gastroduodenal ulcer are also
                                being used.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: V&P: complications of duodenal ulcer disease (bleeding, perforation, and gastric outlet
                                obstruction). V&A: duodenal and prepyloric ulcer disease. PCV: isolated duodenal ulcer disease; recent perforation
                                and minimal peritoneal soilage.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         V&P                              V&A                            PCV

                                 Position                Supine                           ⇐                              ⇐

                                 Incision                Midline or long subcostal        ⇐                              Midline

                                 Special                 Costal margin retractor          ⇐                              ⇐
                                   instrumentation

                                 Antibiotics             Cefotetan 1–2 g iv               ⇐                              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv
        General Surgery

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h                            1.5–3 h                        1.5–2.5 h

                                 Closing                 Muscle relaxation required for   ⇐                              ⇐
                                   considerations        closure; NG suction

                                 EBL                     < 250 mL; greater for emer-      250–500 mL                     < 250 mL
                                                         gency surgeries

                                 Postop care             PACU → ward                      ⇐                              ⇐

                                 Mortality               0–2% (most series include        0–1.6% (most series do not     0–0.4%
                                                         emergencies)                     include emergencies)

                                 Morbidity               Dumping and diarrhea:            17–27%                         —
                                                         6–20%
                                                         Recurrence: 4.9–12.3%            0–2%                           5–15%
                                                                                                                         Impaired gastric emptying:
                                                                                                                         0.3%
                                                                                                                         Necrosis, lesser curve:
                                                                                                                         < 0.3%
                                                                                                                         PE: rare

                                 Pain score              6                                6                              6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Adults

                                 Male:Female             Male > female

                                 Incidence               Declining

                                 Etiology                Acid hypersecretion; abnormal mucosal permeability and repair mechanisms; H. pylori

                                 Associated              Gastrinoma (rare); hyperparathyroidism (rare)
                                   conditions

===== PAGE 509 =====
Operations for Peptic Ulcer Disease        509

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: gastric resections; oversew gastric/duodenal perforation operations for peptic ulcer dis-
                   ease; duodenotomy)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for gastric surgery generally comprise two groups: (1) those presenting for emergency surgery
                   following GI bleeding or perforation, and (2) those presenting with gastric carcinoma or elective treatment of PUD
                   (rare). Patients in the first group are often hemodynamically unstable and require rapid preop assessment and
                   appropriate fluid resuscitation. It is prudent to consider full-stomach precautions in both patient groups (see p. B-5).

                    Respiratory              Patients with GI bleeding are at ↑ risk for aspiration of blood and gastric contents. If this
                                             has occurred, patient may have significant respiratory insufficiency (in urgent need of tra-
                                             cheal intubation for “protection” of airway).
                                             Tests: CXR; consider ABG.

                    Cardiovascular           Hypovolemia may be severe due to N/V, diarrhea, poor po intake, peritonitis, or GI blood loss.
                                             Sx include ↓ skin turgor, ↑ HR, ↓ BP, ↓ UO. Correct hypovolemia before induction of anesthesia.
                                             Tests: Orthostatic vital signs; ECG, if indicated from H&P

                    Renal                    GI fluid loss can lead to renal and electrolyte abnormalities.
                                             Tests: Consider electrolytes; BUN; Cr.

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                    Hematologic              Misleading ↑ Hct 2° GI fluid loss may be present; patients with GI bleeding will likely be
                                             anemic and may have a coagulopathy. Correct coagulopathy and anemia before induction,
                                             if possible.
                                             Tests: CBC with Plts, PT/PTT if coagulopathy suspected

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg. Consider H2-antagonist (ranitidine 50 mg iv slowly), meto-
                                             clopramide (10 mg iv 1 h preop), and Na citrate (30 mL po 10 min preop).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop analgesia (if hemodynamically stable and no coagulopathy). If
                   postop epidural analgesia is planned, insertion of catheter prior to anesthetic induction is helpful to establish correct
                   placement in the epidural space (accomplished by injecting 5–7 mL of 1% lidocaine via the epidural catheter, eliciting
                   a segmental block).

                    Induction                The patient with gastric disease or upper GI bleeding is often at risk for pulmonary aspira-
                                             tion, and the trachea should be intubated with the patient awake or after rapid-sequence
                                             induction with cricoid pressure (see p. B-5). If patient is clinically hypovolemic, restore
                                             intravascular volume (colloid, crystalloid, or blood products) before induction, and titrate
                                             induction dose of sedative/hypnotic agents.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Balanced anesthesia with inhalational agents and/or pro-
                                             pofol infusion, and opiates. Maintain muscle relaxation based on nerve stimulator response.
                                             Discuss with surgeon the need for postop NG tube. If not needed, place OG tube to evacu-
                                             ate stomach contents intraop. Combined epidural/GA: A local anesthetic (2% lidocaine
                                             with 1:200,000 epinephrine) can be injected into a thoracic (2–4 mL) or lumbar (3–6 mL
                                             q 60–90 min) epidural catheter to provide both anesthesia and optimal surgical exposure
                                             (contracted bowel and profound muscle relaxation). A continuous infusion of local anes-
                                             thetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine or 0.25% bupivacaine at 2–5 mL/h [lumbar]; 2–4 mL/h [thoracic]),
                                             may enhance hemodynamic stability, compared to an intermittent bolus. Be prepared to

===== PAGE 510 =====
510   c h a p t e r 7.2       Stomach Surgery

                                Maintenance                 treat ↓ BP with fluid and vasopressors. GA is administered to supplement regional anes-
                                  (cont’d)                  thesia and for amnesia. Systemic sedatives should be minimized during epidural opiate
                                                            administration as they increase the likelihood of postop respiratory depression. Treat ↓ BP
                                                            with fluid and vasopressors. If epidural opiates are used for postop analgesia, a loading
                                                            dose (e.g., hydromorphone 0.6–1.0 mg [lumbar]; 0.4–0.6 mg [thoracic]) may be adminis-
                                                            tered at least 1 h before conclusion of surgery.

                                Emergence                   The decision to extubate at the end of surgery depends on the patient’s underlying cardio-
                                                            pulmonary status and extent of the surgical procedure. Patient should be hemodynamically
                                                            stable, normothermic, cooperative, and fully reversed from any muscle relaxants and with-
                                                            out pulmonary compromise before extubation.

                                Blood and fluid             Anticipate large third-space losses                T&S, consider T&C for 2–4 U PRBC. Plts,
                                   requirements             IV: 14–16 ga ×1–2                                  FFP, and cryoprecipitate should be admin-
                                                            NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                               istered according to lab tests (Plt count, PT,
                                                            Fluid warmer                                       PTT, DIC screen, thromboelastography).
                                                                                                               Expect higher fluid requirements if epidural
                                                                                                               used (2° sympathectomy → vasodilation).
                                                                                                               Maintaining euvolemia is important goal.

                                Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)                         Consider others as indicated by patient’s
                                                            UO                                                 status. Prevent hypothermia: Use forced air
                                                            ± Arterial line                                    warmer, fluid warmer, and warming blanket,
                                                            ± CVP                                              warm room temperature, keeping patient
        General Surgery

                                                                                                               covered until ready for prep, etc.

                                Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                            3 eyes

                                Complications               Acute hemorrhage
                                                            Hypoxemia                                          2° abdominal packs →↓FRC

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               PONV (see p. B-6)
                                                            Hemorrhage
                                                            VTE (see p. B-8)
                                                            Ileus
                                                            Hypothermia

                                Pain                        Epidural analgesics (p. C-3)
                                  management                PCA (p. C-3)

                                Tests                       CXR if CVL placed periop

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Nyhus LM: Selective vagotomy, antrectomy, and gastroduodenostomy for the treatment of duodenal ulcer. In: Fisher JE, McDermott
                                     WD, Holmes CR, et al, eds. Fischer’s Mastery of Surgery, 6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012.
                                  2. Schwaitzberg, SD, Baily RW, Martinez JM, et al: Selective vagotomy and pyloroplasty. In: Fisher JE, McDermott WD, Holmes
                                     CR, et al, eds. Fischer’s Mastery of Surgery, 6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012, 1012–9.
                                  3. Soybel DI, Zinner MJ: Ulcer complications. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, Vol. I, 11th
                                     edition. McGraw-Hill Companies, New York: 2006, 377–416.

===== PAGE 511 =====
Open Operations for Morbid Obesity          511

                   OPEN OPERATIONS FOR MORBID OBESITY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Several studies have demonstrated the superiority of laparoscopic operations for weight loss over open
                   operations (see p. 612). In selected patients (e.g., those with previous upper abdominal surgery [see p. 514]), however,
                   open procedures may be appropriate. Open techniques devised to promote weight loss are of two fundamental types:
                   (1) restrictive procedures, which work by decreasing the size of the gastric pouch, thereby limiting the amount of
                   food that can be consumed at one time; and (2) malabsorptive procedures, which work by bypassing most of the
                   small bowel and creating a state of chronic malabsorption. Of these two general types of procedures, the partitioning
                   procedures may be less effective at promoting weight loss than are the malabsorptive procedures, but are much more
                   popular because they are associated with far fewer serious side effects.
                   The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (Fig. 7.2-4) is the most common weight loss operation in the United States. The abdo-
                   men is entered through an upper midline incision, and the esophagogastric junction is exposed either by retracting
                   the liver superiorly or by taking down the ligamentous attachments of the lateral segment of the left lobe of the liver
                   and retracting this down and to the patient’s right. The upper stomach is mobilized, and two rows of staples are used
                   to partition the stomach into a small proximal and large distal pouch. A Roux segment of jejunum is then anastomosed
                   to the small proximal pouch to provide drainage. An NG tube is placed, and the abdomen is closed with drains.
                   Vertical banded gastroplasty has been replaced by the adjustable gastric band. The abdomen is entered similarly to
                   the gastric bypass operation. The pars flaccida is opened by dividing the gastrohepatic ligament. The base of the right
                   crus is identified, and a tunnel behind the stomach is created. The band is then placed and secured. Silastic tubing

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   from the band is then attached to a port placed in the subcutaneous tissue.
                   An alternative open procedure is the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, which involves a longitudinal gastric
                   resection with a proximal small bowel bypass. Another alternative open procedure is a sleeve gastrectomy, where a gastric
                   tube is created from the gastroesophageal junction to the pylorus over a 36°F dilator. The remainder of the stomach, based
                   on the greater curvature, is resected. Both of these operations are gaining popularity in the bariatric surgery community.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Morbid obesity (> 100 lbs above ideal body weight, 100% over ideal body weight, or BMI
                   > 40), generally in combination with obesity-related comorbidities (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea, hyperlipidemia,
                   osteoarthritis, diabetes, respiratory insufficiency, CHF, hypertension, CAD)
                   Variant procedure or approaches: The jejunoileal (JI) bypass is of historical interest (Fig 7.2-5). One of the early
                   bariatric operations in the 1950s, the JI bypass was constructed by connecting the proximal jejunum to the terminal
                   ileum. This procedure has been largely abandoned because of the many associated complications, including cirrhosis,

                                                      Figure 7.2-3. Vertical banded gastroplasty.

===== PAGE 512 =====
512   c h a p t e r 7.2   Stomach Surgery

                                         Figure 7.2-4. Proximal Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. (Reproduced with permission
                                         from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition.
                                         Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)
        General Surgery

                                         Figure 7.2-5. Schematic representation of jejunoileal by pass. (Reproduced with
                                         permission from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice,
                                         3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 513 =====
Open Operations for Morbid Obesity     513

                   osteoporosis, kidney stones, and intractable diarrhea. Another alternative open procedure is a sleeve gastrectomy
                   where a gastric tube is created from the gastroesophageal junction to the pylorus over a 36°F dilator. The remainder
                   of the stomach, based on the greater curvature is resected. This procedure, in its laparoscopic approach, is growing in
                   popularity worldwide.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Morbid obesity (> 100 lbs above ideal body weight, 100% over ideal body weight, or BMI
                   > 40), generally in combination with obesity-related comorbidities (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea, hyperlipidemia,
                   osteoarthritis, diabetes, respiratory insufficiency, CHF, hypertension, CAD).

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (Sleeve gastrectomy or Roux-en-Y)
                     Position                Supine (Fig. 7.2-6) with reverse Trendelenburg

                     Incision                Midline

                     Special                 Large OR tables; heavy-duty retractors; special stapling devices
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Prophylactic cholecystectomy often advocated in symptomatic patients. Pneumatic compression
                       considerations        boots may not be large enough; heparin (5000 U sc 2 h preop, then q 12 h) used commonly. ↑↑
                                             aspiration risk + potentially difficult airway

                     Antibiotics             ± Cefoxitin 2 g iv

                     Surgical time           2–3 h

                     Closing                 Anticipate 30 min closure time; NG suction

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                       considerations

                     EBL                     < 500 mL

                     Postop care             Postop ventilation may be necessary; VTE precautions.

                     Mortality               0.5–1.6%

                     Morbidity               Wound infection: 4–8%
                                             Anastomotic leak: 3%
                                             Dehiscence: 1.6%
                                             PE: 1–1.6%

                     Pain score              7

                         A                                                        B

                                Figure 7.2-6. A: In standard supine position, the atlantooccipital gap of morbidly
                                obese patient is obliterated by fat, and access for laryngoscope is hindered by large
                                breasts. B: By elevating the shoulders and occiput so that head is in the “sniffing”
                                position, airway access is greatly facilitated.

===== PAGE 514 =====
514   c h a p t e r 7.2     Stomach Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Adult

                                 Male:Female             < 1:1 for disease but 80% of patients who undergo surgery are female

                                 Incidence               20% U.S. population considered morbidly obese

                                 Etiology                Multifactorial

                                 Associated              Sleep apnea ± CO2 retention; CAD/CHF/cardiomyopathy; pulmonary HTN/systemic HTN; diabe-
                                   conditions            tes; unusually high risk of DVT and PE; GERD

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Obesity is associated with many chronic medical problems. Morbidity and mortality rise sharply with increasing age
                                and BMI. Obesity, and length of exposure to obesity, increase the risk of hospital admission and lengthen hospital
                                stay. Medical comorbidities must be optimized before elective bariatric surgery. Evaluate any patient who has had
                                previous bariatric surgery for metabolic changes that can include protein, vitamin, iron, and calcium deficiencies.
                                Review a list of all current medications the patient is taking, including nonprescription appetite suppressors and
                                diet drugs. Many of these drugs can have important side effects. For example, the combination of phentermine and
        General Surgery

                                fenfluramine (“phen-fen”), which is no longer prescribed in the United States, is associated with persistent, serious,
                                heart and lung problems. Another weight loss medication, sibutramine, works in the brain by inhibiting the reuptake
                                of norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, producing a feeling of “anorexia,” which limits food intake. Sibutramine
                                has been implicated as a cause of dysrhythmias and hypertension. Orlistat blocks digestion and absorption of dietary
                                fat by binding lipases in the gastrointestinal tract and can cause deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K). A
                                reduction in vitamin K levels can increase the anticoagulation effects of Coumadin (also see Anesthetic Consider-
                                 ations for Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery, p. 613).

                                Respiratory               Increased O2 consumption and CO2 production (e.g., ↑ basal metabolic rate). ↓ chest-wall
                                                          compliance (↓ 20–60%) with normal lung compliance. ↓ ERV and FRC; so tidal breathing
                                                          may fall within the range of closing capacity → V/Q abnormalities. Supine position fur-
                                                          ther ↓ FRC → worsening hypoxemia. ↑ MV is required to remain normocarbic. There is a
                                                          normal response to CO2 unless patient develops the obesity hypoventilation (Pickwickian)
                                                          syndrome (↑ PaCO2, ↓ PaO2, loss of hypercarbic drive, sleep apnea, hypersomnolence,
                                                          polycythemia, pulmonary HTN, CHF).
                                                          Tests: CXR; PFTs (FVC, FEV1, MMEF25–75 ± bronchodilators; room-air ABG)

                                Cardiovascular            Blood volume and CO ↑ with increasing weight. HTN is very common (use correct size
                                                          BP cuff ). LV dysfunction may be present; patient unable to increase CO or tolerate ↑ blood
                                                          volume. Pulmonary HTN may be present in OSA. Obesity is a risk factor for CAD and sud-
                                                          den death. Anticipate problems with vascular access.
                                                          Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P. (Patient with SOB may require ECHO for LV
                                                          function, as SOB can have a cardiac or pulmonary etiology.)

                                Endocrine                 Glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus (DM) common.
                                                          Tests: Fasting glucose

                                Hepatic                   Liver function is often abnormal. Drug metabolism can be significantly affected. Combined
                                                          with altered pharmacokinetics, many drugs (e.g., midazolam and vecuronium) may have
                                                          unpredictably prolonged action.

                                Gastrointestinal          ↑ intraabdominal pressure, gastric volume, and acidity, with ↑ incidence of hiatal hernia,
                                                          make this patient population at risk for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. Particu-
                                                          lar risk in patients with previous restrictive bariatric surgery.

===== PAGE 515 =====
Open Operations for Morbid Obesity         515

                    Airway                  Obese patients can have airway problems including frequent difficult mask ventilation.
                                            Careful airway examination (e.g., mouth opening, Mallampati classification, thyromental
                                            distance, neck ROM) is paramount. Awake fiberoptic intubation should be considered
                                            if difficult airway access is anticipated. Establish availability of OR table large enough to
                                            
                                            accommodate morbidly obese patient. Special tables are now available.

                    Hematologic             Polycythemia may occur 2° chronic hypoxemia.
                                            Tests: CBC

                    Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Sedatives are best avoided for patients with OSA. A small dose of iv midazolam
                                            (0.5–1.0 mg) may be appropriate for the especially anxious patient. In the bariatric patient,
                                            intramuscular medications can be erroneously injected into adipose tissues. Consider
                                            anticholinergics if performing awake fiberoptic intubation (glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg iv 30
                                             min preop). Consider full-stomach precautions (p. B-5): metoclopramide (10 mg iv 60 min
                                             preop), H2-antagonist (ranitidine 50 mg iv), and nonparticulate antacid (3 M Na citrate)
                                            30 mL, 10 min prior to induction.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop analgesia in open surgeries. If using a combined anesthetic
                   approach, placement of an epidural catheter should be accomplished before induction, with the patient in the sitting

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                   position. A bilateral sensory block (using 5–7 mL 2% lidocaine) will help confirm correct placement of the catheter
                   within the epidural space. Verification of placement is particularly important in this population because regional
                   anesthesia in the obese patient may be technically more difficult.

                    Induction               Patients are at risk for aspiration of gastric contents and should be intubated either awake
                                            (p. B-5) or after rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure. Mask ventilation and ET
                                            intubation may be difficult (2° rapid desaturation, head elevated laryngoscopy position,
                                            redundant tissue). Following successful intubation and induction of anesthesia, an
                                            OG/NG tube should be placed and the stomach contents suctioned. Lipophilic drugs will
                                            have a greater volume of distribution, necessitating increased dosage.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Obese patients metabolize volatile anesthetics to a greater
                                            extent than their nonobese counterparts.
                                            Combined epidural/GA: A local anesthetic (2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine)
                                            can be injected into a thoracic (3–5 mL) or lumbar (5–10 mL q 60 min) epidural catheter to
                                            provide both anesthesia and improved surgical exposure (contracted bowel and profound
                                            muscle relaxation). A continuous infusion of local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine or 0.25%
                                            bupivacaine at 5–10 mL/h [lumbar], 3–5 mL/h [thoracic]) may enhance hemodynamic
                                            stability. The dose of local anesthetic given via epidural catheter should be decreased to
                                            75% of normal dose. Be prepared to treat ↓ BP with fluid and vasopressors (ephedrine 5–10
                                            mg iv, phenylephrine 50–100 mcg iv). GA is administered to supplement regional anesthe-
                                            sia and for amnesia. Sedative drugs (opiates, benzodiazepines, etc.) should be minimized
                                            in the presence of epidural opiates, as they increase the likelihood of postop respiratory
                                            depression. If epidural opiates are used for postop analgesia, a loading dose (e.g., hydro-
                                            morphone 0.6–1.0 mg with lumbar catheter and 0.4–0.6 mg for thoracic) should be admin-
                                            istered 1–2 h before end of surgery.

                    Emergence               The decision to extubate at the end of open surgery depends on patient’s underlying car-
                                            diopulmonary status and the extent of the surgical procedure. Patients should be hemo-
                                            dynamically stable, normothermic, alert, cooperative, and fully reversed from any muscle
                                            relaxants before extubation. Elective ICU admission for postop care may be appropriate.
                                            Following laparoscopic surgery, in contrast, patients typically are extubated and admitted
                                            to PACU.

===== PAGE 516 =====
516   c h a p t e r 7.2       Stomach Surgery

                                Blood and fluid              Anticipate large fluid loss.                  Third-space losses greatly exceed blood loss.
                                   requirements              IV: 14–16 ga ×1–2                             Guide fluid management by UO, filling pressure.
                                                             NS/LR @ 10–15 mL/kg/h                        Euvolemia is an important goal.
                                                             T&S for 2 U PRBC.
                                                             Warm fluids.

                                Monitoring                   Standard monitors (p. B-1)                   Invasive monitoring as clinically indicated. Arterial
                                                             UO                                           line if noninvasive BP unreliable 2° extremity size.
                                                             ± Arterial line

                                Positioning                  Supine position = ↓FRC                       Supine positioning → ↓ lung volumes, which may
                                                             3 and pad pressure points                    ↑ V/Q mismatch → hypoxemia. This is exacerbated
                                                             3 eyes                                       by use of the Trendelenburg position, which usually
                                                             * NB: Avoid Trendelenburg                    is not well tolerated by morbidly obese patients.

                                Complications                Hypoxemia 2° ↓FRC                            100% O2 → absorption atelectasis

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications                Hypoxemia                                    Recover patient in sitting position to improve venti-
                                                             Hypercarbia                                  latory mechanics. Give supplemental O2.
                                                             VTE (see p. B-8)                             Verify VTE prophylaxis.
                                                             Atelectasis
        General Surgery

                                Pain                         Epidural analgesia: hydromorphone            If epidural is used for postop analgesia, Pain Service
                                  management                 (0.6–1.0 mg with lumbar cath and             management recommended.
                                                             0.4–0.6 mg for thoracic cath load
                                                             then 0.1–0.3 mg/h infusion)
                                                             PCA (p. C-3)

                                Tests                        ABG                                          Others as clinically indicated.
                                                             CXR                                          CXR for central line placement

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Austrheim-Smith I, Brethauer SA, Rogula T, Wolfe BM: Evolution of bariatric minimally invasive surgery. In: Schauer PR,
                                     Schirmer BD, Brethauer SA, eds. Minimally invasive bariatric surgery. Springer, New York: 2007, 17–24.
                                  2. Brodsky JB, Lemmens HJM, Brock-Utne JG, et al: Morbid obesity and tracheal intubation. Anesth Analg 2002; 94:732–6.
                                  3. Brodsky JB, Lemmens HJM: Anesthetic drugs and bariatric surgery. Expert Rev Neurother 2006; 6(7):1107–13.
                                  4. Brodsky JB, Lemmens HJM: Regional anesthesia and obesity. Obes Surg 2007; 17(9):1146–9.
                                  5. Brolin RE: Bariatric surgery and long-term control of morbid obesity. JAMA 2002; 288(22):2793–6.
                                  6. Buchwald H, Buchwald JN: Evolution of operative procedures for the management of morbid obesity 1950–2000. Obes Surg
                                     2002; 12(5):705–17.
                                  7. Choban PS, Jackson B, Poplawski S, Bistolarides P: Bariatric surgery for morbid obesity: why, who, when, how, where, and
                                     then what? Cleve Clin J Med 2002; 69(11):897–903.
                                  8. Clements RH: Open gastric bypass for morbid obesity. In: Fisher JE, McDermott WD, Holmes CR, et al, eds. Fischer’s Mastery
                                     of Surgery, 6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2012, 1012–9.
                                  9. DeMaria EJ: Morbid Obesity. In: Greenfield LJ, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott
                                     Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 736–42.
                                 10. Livingston EH: obesity and its surgical management. Am J Surg 2002; 184(2):103–13.
                                 11. Ogunnaike BO, Jones SB, Jones DB, Provost D, Whitten CW: Anesthetic considerations for bariatric surgery. Anesth Analg
                                     2002; 95(6):1793–805.
                                 12. Perilla V, Sollazzi L, Bozza P, et al: The effects of the reverse Trendelenburg position on respiratory mechanics and blood gases
                                     in morbidly obese patients during bariatric surgery. Anesth Analg 2000; 91:1520–5.

===== PAGE 517 =====
Gastrostomy Placement      517

                   GASTROSTOMY PLACEMENT
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A gastrostomy is a tube placed through the abdominal wall directly into the stomach. Such tubes can
                   be used for gastric decompression or for feeding, and they may be permanent or temporary. Patients undergoing
                   gastrostomy placement often have neurologic impairment that compromises their ability to handle oral s ecretions
                   and increases their risk of aspiration. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG), in contrast to the other tech-
                   niques, most commonly is performed using iv sedation and local anesthesia.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: The traditional Stamm gastrostomy usually is placed at the time of a lapa-
                   rotomy performed for another purpose; or it may be performed through a separate, small laparotomy incision in
                   patients in whom endoscopic placement is not possible for technical reasons. The incision may be upper midline
                   or transverse directly over the stomach. The anterior wall of the stomach is identified, and two purse-string sutures
                   are placed in the stomach around the site where the tube will enter. The gastrostomy tube is introduced through the
                   abdominal wall directly over the intended site of entry into the stomach. A small hole is made in the stomach in the
                   center of the purse-string sutures, the tube is introduced into the stomach, and the purse-strings are tied securely
                   around the tube. The wound is then closed. GA usually is preferred, but the operation may be performed under local
                   anesthesia in thin patients.
                   The Janeway gastrostomy, a technical modification, also requires a laparotomy. The greater curvature of the stom-
                   ach is identified and a stapler placed across a portion of this, creating a tube that arises from the main body of the
                   stomach. The staple line may be oversewn, and then the end of the tube is brought through the abdominal wall and

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                   matured to the skin as a small stoma. This allows for permanent access to the stomach with removal of the tube
                   between feedings and is useful in patients with long-term dependence on gastrostomy access. The Janeway gastros-
                   tomy is rarely used, although young patients with neurologic impairment who are expected to need lifetime gastros-
                   tomy feeding are good candidates.
                   For a PEG, the stomach is intubated endoscopically and the gastric and abdominal walls punctured under endoscop-
                   ic guidance. The gastrostomy tube is introduced through the mouth and passed through the stomach and abdominal
                   wall from inside out. In most centers, this has become the most common technique of gastrostomy placement due to
                   its simplicity and because, in many patients, it can be performed under local anesthesia with MAC. Previous gastric
                   operations may make endoscopic placement difficult or dangerous, as may some obstructing lesions of the esophagus
                   or pharynx. To avoid damage to the back wall of the stomach, the anesthesiologist may be asked to inject air forcefully
                   into the stomach.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Temporary gastrostomies often are used after major abdominal surgery as an alternative
                   to NG suction. Percutaneous gastrostomies often are placed in patients with advanced malignancy and intestinal
                   obstruction or inadequate oral intake, and in patients with neurologic impairment and difficulty eating.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Stamm                         Janeway                       PEG

                     Position               Supine                        ⇐                             ⇐

                     Incision               Midline or transverse         ⇐                             Puncture

                     Special                None                          ⇐                             Endoscope, percutaneous
                       instrumentation                                                                  gastrostomy kit

                     Antibiotics            ± Cefazolin 1–2 g iv          ⇐                             ⇐

                     Surgical time          45 min                        1h                            0.5–1 h

                     Closing                Muscle relaxation for         ⇐                             None
                       considerations       closure

                     EBL                    Minimal                       ⇐                             ⇐

===== PAGE 518 =====
518   c h a p t e r 7.2     Stomach Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                 Mortality               Minimal                         ⇐                               ⇐

                                 Morbidity               Wound infection: 2.1–9%         ⇐                               –
                                                         Hemorrhage: 0.9–1.1%            ⇐                               ⇐
                                                         Aspiration pneumonia: 2.2%      ⇐                               1.6%
                                                         Failure to function: 2.2%       ⇐                               –

                                 Pain score              4–5                             5                               1–2

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               All ages, though with peaks in infancy and the elderly

                                 Male:Female             ~1:1

                                 Incidence               Common

                                 Etiology                See Preop Diagnosis, above

                                 Associated              Gastrostomy placed at time of laparotomy, when NG drainage is anticipated for prolonged period.
                                   conditions            For feeding in the neurologically impaired or in those with complex upper digestive difficulties.
                                                         Advanced malignancy (for either feeding or palliative decompression).
        General Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Ostomy Procedures in Intestinal Surgery, p. 527.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Ozmen MN, Akhan O: Percutaneous radiologic gastrostomy. Eur J Radiol 2002; 43(3):186–95.
                                  2. Pennington C: To PEG or not to PEG. Clin Med 2002; 2(3):250–5.

===== PAGE 519 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.3 Intestinal
                                             Surgery

                                             surgeons
                                             Jeffrey A. Norton, MD
                                             Harry A. Oberhelman, MD, FACS

                                             anesthesiologist
                                             Kevin A. Malott, MD

===== PAGE 520 =====
DUODENOTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: A duodenotomy is performed to ligate a bleeding vessel at the base of a duodenal ulcer or to perform
                                some procedure on the ampulla of Vater or the duct of Santorini or to remove a low-grade duodenal tumor. It is
                                important, therefore, to be familiar with the anatomy of the proximal duodenum in relation to the major and minor
                                pancreatic duct orifices (Fig. 7.3-1). The duodenotomy may be made longitudinally or transversely, depending on the
                                surgeon’s preference. A transverse opening allows one to close the duodenotomy without tension; however, it must
                                be made very accurately for the purpose of exposure. Therefore, a longitudinal duodenotomy is preferred. With mo-
                                bilization it can be closed transversely. Bleeding vessels at the base of an ulcer must be secured with suture ligatures.
                                Care must be taken to avoid perforating the duodenum when performing a sphincterotomy.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Duodenal ulcer; impacted common duct stone; chronic pancreatitis 2° alcoholism,
                                gallstones, pancreatic divisum, or other obstruction of the main pancreatic duct, benign ampullary tumor, duodenal
                                neuroendocrine tumor.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine

                                 Incision                 Midline abdominal or subcostal
        General Surgery

                                 Unique                   Magnifying glasses, if operation involves lesser pancreatic sphincter
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv

                                 VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time            1–2 h

                                 Closing                  Secure closure of duodenum without tension usually two layers
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                      Minimal

                                 Postop care              ± NG decompression

                                 Mortality                < 0.5%

                                 Morbidity                Duodenal leak: < 2%
                                                          Postop pancreatitis: < 3%

                                 Pain score               6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                Any age

                                 Male:Female              1:1

                                 Incidence                Not uncommon

                                 Etiology                 Duodenal ulcer; impacted common duct stone; villous tumors of ampulla; chronic pancreatitis,
                                                          pancreatic divisum

                                 Associated               Bleeding duodenal ulcer (50–60%); chronic pancreatitis (20–25%); impacted common duct
                                   conditions             stones (10–15%), tumor (2%)

                          520

===== PAGE 521 =====
Open Appendectomy         521

                                                                                                Duodenum

                               Figure 7.3-1. Anatomy of pancreatic ductal system. In 30% of patients, the accessory
                               duct ends blindly. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW,
                               Oldham KT, et al: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott
                               Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Peptic Ulcer Disease, Stomach Surgery, p. 527.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Cisco RM, Norton JA: Surgery for gastrinoma. Adv Surg 2007; 41:65–76.

                   OPEN APPENDECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Open appendectomy is performed for appendicitis or suspected appendicitis; however, it has been
                   largely replaced by the laparoscopic approach (see p. 611). The negative laparotomy rate has been reduced by the
                   judicious use of preoperative CT examination. Through a RLQ (McBurney) or right paramedian incision, the cecum
                   is exposed and pulled into the wound (Fig. 7.3-2). The appendix is then delivered through the wound; and the meso-
                   appendix is clamped, cut, and ligated. The appendix is removed by crushing, ligating, and then transecting the base.
                   The appendiceal stump may be invaginated into the wall of the cecum or left alone. In some instances it may be easier
                   to divide the base of the appendix before delivering the appendix into the wound. The wound should be left open and
                   soft drains used in cases of perforated appendix. In children, the appendix may be inverted and allowed to slough off
                   internally. In laparoscopic procedures, the appendix is usually transected with an endoscopic stapling device. This
                   method is also being used in open procedures.
                   Variant procedure or approach: Laparoscopic appendectomy (see p. 606).

===== PAGE 522 =====
522   c h a p t e r 7.3   Intestinal Surgery

                                                                                                                 Appendix

                                            Figure 7.3-2. Relevant anatomy for appendectomy. (Reproduced with permission
                                            from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott
                                            Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)
        General Surgery

                                Usual preop diagnosis: Appendicitis

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                RLQ (McBurney’s) or right paramedian

                                 Unique                  Variation in stump closure; NG tube if prolonged ileus expected.
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 1–2 g preop

                                 VTE prophylaxis         Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time           1h

                                 Closing                 Skin wound should not be closed when appendix is perforated. Drain in presence of well-defined
                                   considerations        abscess cavity.

                                 EBL                     < 75 mL

                                 Postop care             Wound care when left open

                                 Mortality               Perforated: 2%
                                                         Nonperforated: < 0.1%

                                 Morbidity               Pelvic, subphrenic, or intraabdominal abscess (perforation): 20%
                                                         Wound abscess: < 5%
                                                         Fecal fistula: < 1%
                                                         Wound hematoma: < 0.5%
                                                         Ileus: Variable

                                 Pain score              5–7

===== PAGE 523 =====
Excision of Meckel’s Diverticulum        523

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               1/15 persons

                     Etiology                Obstruction (80–90%); fecaliths (75%); carcinoid tumors (< 5%)

                     Associated              None
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Consideration following Excision of Meckel’s diverticulum, below p. 524.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Nguyen NT, Hinojosa MW, Fayad C, et al: Laparoscopic surgery is associated with a lower incidence of venous thromboem-
                        bolism compared with open surgery. Ann Surg 2007; 246:1021–7.
                     2. See Suggested Readings following Excision of Meckel’s diverticulum, pp. 525–526.

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                   EXCISION OF MECKEL’S DIVERTICULUM
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Meckel’s diverticulum is a true congenital diverticulum, usually arising within 100 cm of the ileoce-
                   cal valve. It was first described by Meckel in 1809. Excision of a Meckel’s diverticulum is indicated for bleeding,
                   obstruction, perforation, inflammation, intussusception, and when there is a palpable mass near the base of the
                   diverticulum. Ectopic mucosa is present in roughly 50% of symptomatic patients, with gastric mucosa the most
                   frequent. After entering the peritoneal cavity, the distal ileum, along with the diverticulum, is delivered into the
                   wound. The diverticulum is excised, and the wound is closed in two layers. Following excision of the diverticulum,
                   care must be taken not to narrow the bowel lumen during closure. If a diagnosis can be made preop, a laparoscopic
                   approach may be used (see Laparoscopic Bowel Resection p. 602).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Meckel’s diverticulum

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Midline abdominal or RLQ (McBurney’s)

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv

                     VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                     Surgical time            1–1.5 h

                     EBL                      < 100 mL

                     Mortality                < 0.5%

===== PAGE 524 =====
524   c h a p t e r 7.3   Intestinal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Morbidity                Wound infection: 5%
                                                          Pulmonary complication: < 5%
                                                          Anastomotic leak: < 1%

                                 Pain score               6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               < 40 yr

                                 Male:Female             3:1

                                 Incidence               0.3–2.5%

                                 Etiology                Congenital

                                 Associated              Exomphalos; esophageal atresia; anorectal atresia; gross malformations of CNS or CV system
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        General Surgery

                                (Procedures covered: open appendectomy; excision of Meckel’s diverticulum)

                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                This patient population is generally fit and healthy, apart from their acutely presenting illness. These patients are at
                                risk for aspiration pneumonitis due to delayed gastric emptying, ileus, or frank bowel obstruction → full stomach
                                precautions are appropriate. Surgery for appendicitis is one of the most common nonobstetric procedures performed
                                on the pregnant patient (~1/1500 pregnancies). These patients often are more ill at the time of diagnosis because early
                                symptoms may be attributed to pregnancy, and the gravid uterus may hinder an accurate abdominal exam. Anesthesia
                                management for the gravid appendicitis patient mirrors that of the nongravid patient (full-stomach precautions) with
                                consideration of the maternal physiologic changes of pregnancy and the effects of anesthesia on the fetus and utero-
                                placental perfusion (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cervical Cerclage, Obstetric Surgery, p. 853.)

                                Respiratory               Respiratory impairment may occur 2° the acute abdominal pain and splinting. Tachypnea
                                                          and hyperpnea can be heralding Sx of appendiceal perforation and sepsis. Patients with an
                                                          acute abdomen should be treated as if they have full stomachs. Consider administration
                                                          of metoclopramide (10 mg iv), H2-antagonist (ranitidine 50 mg iv), and Na citrate 0.3 M
                                                          30 mL po.
                                                          Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular            May be dehydrated from fever, emesis, and ↓ oral intake → ↑ HR + ↑ BP (2° pain), or ↓ BP
                                                          (sepsis, hypovolemia). Assess volume status appropriately and hydrate adequately prior to
                                                          proceeding with anesthetic induction.
                                                          Tests: ECG, if indicated from H&P

                                Gastrointestinal          Patient typically has abdominal pain with N/V. Muscular resistance to palpation of ab-
                                                          dominal wall frequently parallels the severity of the inflammatory process. With spreading
                                                          peritoneal irritation (as with perforation), patient will develop abdominal distension and
                                                          paralytic ileus. Electrolyte abnormalities are common 2° N/V.
                                                          Tests: Electrolytes

===== PAGE 525 =====
Excision of Meckel’s Diverticulum       525

                    Hematologic              Moderate leukocytosis (10,000–18,000) with moderate left shift. Hemoconcentration is
                                             probable if patient is dehydrated.
                                             Tests: CBC

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5). Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Opiate medications
                                             (morphine 0.03–0.15 mg/kg iv) often delayed or minimized until diagnosis made. Opi-
                                             ate analgesics not contraindicated during the evaluation of an acute abdomen including
                                             appendicitis.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, with rapid-sequence iv induction, followed by ET intubation (see full-stomach pre-
                   cautions, p. B-5). If systemic sepsis is absent, hydration is adequate, the patient is cooperative, and high abdominal
                   exploration is unlikely, then regional anesthesia may be considered for open procedures.

                    Induction                Rapid-sequence induction of anesthesia (see p. B-5). Restore intravascular volume prior to
                                             anesthetic induction if patient is hypovolemic.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3), without N2O. Evacuate stomach with OG or NG tube.

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                             Maintain muscle relaxation based on nerve stimulator response.

                    Emergence                Patient should be extubated awake after return of airway reflexes.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 16–18 ga × 1
                       requirements          NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        Others, as indicated by patient’s status.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                             3 eyes

                    Complications            Sepsis

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Sepsis (possible with appendiceal      Adequate antibiotic coverage
                                             rupture)
                                             Paralytic ileus
                                             Atelectasis                            Adequate pain control, incentive spirometry, early
                                             PONV (see p. B-6)                      ambulation

                    Pain                     PCA (see p. C-5).
                      management

                    Tests                    As indicated clinically.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Morgan EG, Mikhail MS, Murray MJ: Clinical Anesthesiology, 4th edition. Lange Medical Books, Stamford: 2006,
                        919–20.
                     2. Rosen MA: Management of anesthesia for the pregnant surgical patient. Anesthesiology 1999; 91:1159–63.

===== PAGE 526 =====
526   c h a p t e r 7.3   Intestinal Surgery

                                  3. Way LW, Doherty GM, eds: Current Surgical Diagnosis Treatment. Appleton & Lange, Stamford: 1994, 610–13.
                                  4. Zani A, Eatons S, Rees CM, Pierro A: Incidentally detected Meckel diverticulum: to resect or not to resect? Ann Surg 2008;
                                     247:276–81.

                                ENTEROSTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Enterostomy is performed for stenting the small intestine with a long tube for feeding purposes,
                                for bypassing small or large bowel obstructions, and as a permanent or temporary procedure following procto-
                                colectomy. An intestinal tube is either purse-stringed into the small bowel and brought through the abdominal
                                wall or the intestine itself is brought to the exterior and fashioned into a stoma. Different tubes are used for
                                feeding, according to surgeon’s preference. After purse-stringing the tube in the bowel, the seromuscular layer
                                of the jejunum is sutured over the tube for a distance of 3–4 cm before exiting through the abdominal wall.
                                This is called a Witsell feeding jejunostomy. The Brooke ileostomy is created by bringing a 2-inch segment of
                                ileum through an abdominal wall stab wound. The ileum is folded back on itself and sutured to the skin edge
                                or dermis (Fig. 7.3-3). Some surgeons secure the ileum to the underlying peritoneum and/or fascia, but this is
                                not necessary.
        General Surgery

                                Variant procedure or approaches: There are various intestinal or drainage tubes that may be inserted into the
                                bowel, depending on the function required. For example, certain tubes are used for feeding, whereas others may be
                                used for drainage or decompression.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Intestinal obstruction due to extensive adhesions; following removal of the large intestine
                                (including the rectum); for enteral feedings

                                          Figure 7.3-3. Brooke ileostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Hardy JD: Rhoad’s
                                          Textbook of Surgery, 5th edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1977.)

===== PAGE 527 =====
Enterostomy   527

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Enterostomy                                         Ileostomy

                     Position               Supine                                              ⇐

                     Incision               Midline abdominal                                   ⇐

                     Antibiotics            Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv preop                            ⇐

                     VTE prophylaxis        Heparin 5000 units sq                               ⇐

                     Surgical time          1–1.5 h                                             ⇐

                     Closing                Securing tube to abdominal wall                     Viable stoma
                       considerations

                     EBL                    < 100 mL                                            ⇐

                     Postop care            Tube irrigation                                     Stoma care

                     Mortality              < 0.5%                                              ⇐

                     Morbidity              Ileus: 60–70%                                       ⇐
                                            Wound infection: < 5%                               ⇐
                                                                                                Stoma necrosis: < 2%

                     Pain score             5–6                                                 5–6

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              20–65 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common

                     Etiology               Intestinal obstruction (60–70%); diseases resulting in total proctocolectomy (10–15%); inability
                                            to eat (5–10%)

                     Associated             Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); intestinal adhesions; inability to eat
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR OSTOMY PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: enterostomy; continent ileostomy; gastrostomy; gastrojejunostomy)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   This patient population is very diverse and includes those with IBD, cancer, and those presenting post-CVA and
                   trauma. Thus, the population ranges from the otherwise healthy to the critically ill. Many of these patients will have
                   abnormal protective airway reflexes and are at risk of aspiration of gastric contents.

                    Respiratory              Patients post-CVA or head trauma may have abnormal laryngeal reflexes and difficulty
                                             swallowing, making them prone to aspiration of gastric contents and associated pneumo-
                                             nitis (evaluate gag reflex). Decreased pulmonary reserve and hypoxemia can be seen in
                                             patients with pulmonary infections.
                                             Tests: Consider CXR to r/o pneumonia. Consider ABG.

                    Cardiovascular           Patients may be hypovolemic 2° chronically poor po intake.
                                             Tests: ECG; orthostatic vital signs

                    Musculoskeletal          Patients often sick and debilitated (e.g., post-CVA).

===== PAGE 528 =====
528   c h a p t e r 7.3    Intestinal Surgery

                                Gastrointestinal            Patients often malnourished and prone to electrolyte abnormalities 2° poor po intake.
                                                            Tests: Electrolytes; BUN; Cr, consider PT/PTT.

                                Laboratory                  CBC with differential; others as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication               Depends on patient status. Titrate small doses of benzodiazepines (midazolam 0.25–0.5
                                                            mg iv) or opiate (fentanyl 25–50 mcg iv). Consider H2-antagonists (e.g., ranitidine 50 mg iv,
                                                            60 min preop) and metoclopramide (10 mg iv 20 min preop).

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA is appropriate for most ostomy procedures; MAC with local anesthesia may be
                                appropriate in selected patients.

                                Induction                   Patient may be at risk for pulmonary aspiration. If GA is planned, consider rapid-sequence
                                                            induction with cricoid pressure. If patient is hypovolemic, restore intravascular volume
                                                            (colloid, crystalloid, or blood products) prior to induction and titrate induction doses of
                                                            sedative/hypnotic agents.

                                Maintenance                 MAC: Titration of sedatives (e.g., propofol 25–150 mcg/kg/min) and analgesics (fentanyl
                                                            25–50 mcg iv). GA: Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                                Emergence                   Trachea should be extubated after return of protective laryngeal reflexes, if patient at risk
                                                            for aspiration of gastric contents.
        General Surgery

                                Blood and fluid             Minimal blood loss
                                   requirements             IV: 18–20 ga × 1
                                                            NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h

                                Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1).           Others as clinically indicated.

                                Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points
                                                            3 eyes

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               PONV, ilEW
                                                            Aspiration
                                                            VTE (see appendix p. B-8)

                                Pain                        PCA (see p. C-3).
                                  management

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Cingi A, Solmaz A, Attaqllah W, et al: Enterostomy closure site hernias: a clinical and ultrasonographic evaluation. Hernia
                                     2008; 12(4):401–5.
                                  2. Zinner MJ, Schwartz SI, Ellis H, eds: Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, Vol I, 10th edition. Appleton & Lange, Stamford, CT:
                                     1997, 427–51.

                                CONTINENT ILEOSTOMY POUCH (KOCK)
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: A Kock pouch consists of an internal reservoir fashioned from the distal ileum and an intussuscepted
                                nipple valve used to provide continence. Approximately 45 cm of small bowel are required for construction of the

===== PAGE 529 =====
Continent Ileostomy Pouch (Kock)    529

                                Figure 7.3-4. Continent ileostomy or Kock pouch. (Reproduced with permission
                                from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia:

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                1988.)

                   pouch and valve. After suturing two limbs of the ileum together over a distance of 15 cm, the distal segment is intus-
                   suscepted over itself to form the nipple valve. The pouch is then sutured closed and mounted beneath the abdominal
                   wall stoma site (Fig. 7.3-4). The stoma is made flush with the skin for cosmetic reasons and left intubated for 1 month
                   with a special plastic catheter. The pouch remains decompressed for 1 month before intermittent catheterization is
                   initiated. The continent ileostomy reservoir has been modified by Barnett to include the construction of an isoperi-
                   staltic valve with an intestinal collar around its base to prevent deintussusception and valve prolapse. These proce-
                   dures are typically performed following a total proctocolectomy or to replace conventional ileostomies.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Inflammatory bowel disease; familial polyposis or malfunctioning ileostomies

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (KOCK OR BARNETT POUCH)
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Midline abdominal

                     Special                 GIA or TA staplers
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Usual bowel prep with antibiotics; cefoxitin 1 g iv preop

                     VTE prophylaxis         Heparin 5000 units sq

                     Surgical time           3–4 h

                     Closing                 Valve vascularity
                       considerations

                     EBL                     200–300 mL

                     Postop care             Maintain pouch decompression

                     Mortality               < 1%

===== PAGE 530 =====
530   c h a p t e r 7.3    Intestinal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (KOCK OR BARNETT POUCH) (cont’d)
                                 Morbidity                  Intestinal ileus: 5%
                                                            Wound infection: < 5%
                                                            Intestinal obstruction: 2–3%
                                                            Pouch fistula: 1–3%
                                                            Valve necrosis: < 0.5%

                                 Pain score                 6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                  18–80 yr

                                 Male:Female                1:1

                                 Incidence                  Common

                                 Etiology                   Ileostomy (50%); proctocolectomy (5%)

                                 Associated                 Extracolonic inflammatory bowel manifestations (10%)
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
        General Surgery

                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Ostomy Procedures, p. 527.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Barnett WO: Modified techniques for improving the continent ileostomy. Am Surg 1984; 50(2):66–9.
                                  2. Becker JM, Stuchni AF: Ulcerative colitis. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific
                                     Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 1070–89.
                                  3. Little UR, Barboors RN, Shrock TR, et al: The continent ileostomy–long-term durability and patient satisfaction. J Gastrointest
                                     Surg 1999; 3:625–32.
                                  4. Oncel M, Church JM, Remzi FH, Fazio VW: Colonic surgery in patients with juvenile polyposis syndrome: a case series.
                                     Dis Colon Rectum 2005; 48:49.
                                  5. Smith LE: Surgical therapy in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1989; 18:99–110.

                                SMALL-BOWEL RESECTION WITH ANASTOMOSIS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Resection of the small bowel is performed for a number of diseases (listed below). This is being done by
                                laparoscopy with increasing frequency. After entering the peritoneal cavity, the involved small bowel is delivered into
                                the wound and the lesion resected between bowel clamps (Fig. 7.3-5). Varying amounts of mesentery are included,
                                depending on the diagnosis. More extensive resections are indicated for malignant disease, including regional lymph
                                nodes. Reanastomosis may be accomplished by various suturing techniques or stapling. The peritoneal cavity may
                                be accessed through vertical or transverse incisions or laparoscopy. Operative techniques include open end-to-end,
                                closed end-to-end, side-to-side, or stapled, functional end-to-end anastomoses.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Laparoscopic small-bowel resections are being performed more frequently
                                (see p. 602).
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Intestinal obstruction, complicated by intestinal gangrene due to adhesions, internal her-
                                nia, volvulus, intussusception, mesenteric vascular occlusion, Crohn’s disease, radiation enteritis, intestinal fistulae,
                                small bowel tumors, trauma, and carcinoid tumors.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                   Supine

                                 Incision                   Vertical or transverse

===== PAGE 531 =====
Small-Bowel Resection with Anastomosis        531

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Unique                   Adequate fluid resuscitation; NG tube
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv preop

                     VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                     Surgical time            1–3 h

                     EBL                      50–100 mL

                     Postop care              NG or long intestinal tube decompression

                     Mortality                Varies according to etiology: 1–5%

                     Morbidity                Atelectasis: < 10%
                                              Intestinal ileus: < 10%
                                              Wound infection: < 5%
                                              Intestinal leak, fistula: < 3%

                     Pain score               7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                20–90 yr

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Common

                     Etiology                 Interference with blood supply (obstruction, strangulated hernia, volvulus, mesenteric thrombo-
                                              sis); trauma; tumors; Crohn’s disease

                     Associated               Multiple, depending on etiology (see Preop diagnosis, above).
                       conditions

                                Figure 7.3-5. Block-Potts bowel clamps are applied from the antimesenteric to mesenteric
                                border to avoid twisting. A Kocher clamp is applied on the specimen side, and the bowel
                                is transected with a scalpel. (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE, eds:
                                Mastery of Surgery, Vol II, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 532 =====
532   c h a p t e r 7.3    Intestinal Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Intestinal and Peritoneal Procedures, p. 534.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Chaiyasate K, Jain AK, Cheung LY, et al: Prognostic factors in primary adenocarcinoma of the small intestine. World J Surg
                                     Oncol 2008; 31:6–12.
                                  2. Riccioni ME, Cianci R, Urgesi R, et al: Advances in diagnosis and treatment of small bowel tumors. Surg Endosc 2012; 26:438.

                                ENTEROLYSIS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Enterolysis consists of separating loops of bowel adhesed to other loops or the abdominal wall by sharp
                                dissection and by excising adhesive bands. Care must be taken to avoid producing enterotomies. Covering potential
                                adhesion sites with a hyaluronic carboxymethylcellulose membrane may lessen the formation of intraperitoneal
                                 adhesions. This operation can also be done laparoscopically with fewer recurrent adhesions.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Intraabdominal adhesions; intestinal obstruction

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
        General Surgery

                                 Position                  Supine

                                 Incision                  Midline abdominal

                                 Special                   A long intestinal tube may be necessary for decompression and fixation of bowel loop.
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                    Bowel decompression
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics               Cefoxitin 1 g iv preop

                                 VTE prophylaxis           Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time             1–4 h

                                 Closing                   Adequate decompression to permit wound closure
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                       150–500 mL

                                 Postop care               PACU; continued intestinal decompression 2–5 d

                                 Mortality                 1–3%

                                 Morbidity                 Wound abscess: 15–20%
                                                           Prolonged ileus: 10–20%
                                                           Fistula formation: < 10%
                                                           Pulmonary complications: 5–10%
                                                           Recurrent intestinal obstruction: 5–8%

                                 Pain score                5–7

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 Any age

                                 Male:Female               1:1

                                 Incidence                 Common

===== PAGE 533 =====
Closure of Enteric Fistulae        533

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Etiology                 Previous intraabdominal operative procedure (> 90%); malignant tumors (15–20%); hernias
                                              (10–15%); volvulus (5–10%); inflammatory bowel disease (5%); gallstone ileus (< 5%); intussus-
                                              ception (< 5%), radiation

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Intestinal and Peritoneal Procedures, p. 534.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Aydeniz B, Teppey-Wessels K, Honig A, et al: Laparoscopic enterolysis before adjuvant radiotherapy in a case of endometrial
                        cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2004; 92:331–3.
                     2. Vrijland WW, Tseng LN, Eijkman HJ, et al: Fewer intraperitoneal adhesions with use of hyaluronic acid-carboxymethylcellulose
                        membrane: a randomized clinical trial. Ann Surg 2002; 235:193–9.

                   CLOSURE OF ENTERIC FISTULAE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                   Description: Enteric fistulae may occur between the bowel and abdominal wall (enterocutaneous), between
                   loops of the intestine (enteroenteric or enterocolic), or between the bowel and bladder or vagina (enterovesical or
                   enterovaginal). Surgical repair is usually reserved for fistulae to the abdominal wall, bladder, and vagina and consists
                   of excising the fistula and repairing the bowel and the other organ separately. Most fistulae are characterized by the
                   adherence of the two visceral organs with a communication between their lumens.
                   The organs involved are separated by blunt-sharp dissection and repaired locally after excision of the indurated
                   margins of the defect. In the case of both the small and large intestines, it may be necessary to resect a segment
                   of bowel with the defect and to perform an end-to-end anastomosis. If the repair sites involved lie close together,
                   it is important to interpose tissue, such as the omentum, between the viscera to minimize chance of recurrence.
                   Occasionally, a fistula may be bypassed rather than surgically resected.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Enteric fistula

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Midline abdominal

                     Unique                   Preop nutritional support and fistula wound care
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv preop

                     VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                     Surgical time            2–4 h

                     Closing                  Separation of repairs by interposition of omentum and other tissue
                       considerations

                     EBL                      50–300 mL

                     Postop care              NG decompression until bowel function returns; TPN support

                     Mortality                0–5%

===== PAGE 534 =====
534   c h a p t e r 7.3    Intestinal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Morbidity                 Ileus: 60–70%
                                                           Pulmonary complications: 10%
                                                           Recurrent fistula: 5–10%
                                                           Wound infection: 5–10%

                                 Pain score                6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 Any age

                                 Male:Female               1:1

                                 Incidence                 Common

                                 Etiology                  Anastomotic leaks (60–70%); carcinoma (10–15%); Crohn’s disease (5–10%); iatrogenic bowel injury
                                                           (5–10%); perforative diverticulitis (5–10%); radiation enteritis (5%); foreign body perforation (< 5%)

                                 Associated                Malnutrition (30%); inflammatory bowel disease (25%); cancer (15%)
                                   conditions

                                Suggested Reading
                                  1. Schecter WP, Hirshberg A, Chang DS, et al: Enteric fistulas: principles of management. J Ann Coll Surg 2009; 209:484.
        General Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR INTESTINAL AND
                                        PERITONEAL PROCEDURES
                                (Procedures covered: small-bowel resection; enterolysis; closure of enteric fistulae; excision of intraabdomi-
                                nal and retroperitoneal tumor; drainage of subphrenic abscess)

                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients requiring exploratory laparotomy present both electively and emergently for a very wide range of condi-
                                tions. As a result of their abdominal pathology, these patients are often at high risk for the pulmonary aspiration
                                of gastric contents. Precautions to prevent this are necessary to help ensure safe patient outcome (see p. B-5).

                                Respiratory                 Respiratory insufficiency can be present due to intraabdominal pathology (e.g., ascites,
                                                            large tumor, free blood, bowel distension, pain); ↓ FRC → ↑ A-a gradient and arterial
                                                            hypoxemia; diaphragmatic impairment and splinting → ↑ respiratory insufficiency.
                                                            Tests: Consider CXR; ABG.

                                Cardiovascular              Patients for emergency surgery are often critically ill and unstable and should be evaluated
                                                            for presence of hypovolemia (hypotension, tachycardia) and should receive adequate volume
                                                            replacement before anesthetic induction. Elective patients may be hypovolemic 2° bowel prep.
                                                            Tests: ECG; consider orthostatic vital signs.

                                Musculoskeletal             Abdominal rigidity may be present; abdominal pain is common.

                                Gastrointestinal            Diarrhea, vomiting, and prolonged NPO status can lead to electrolyte abnormalities.
                                                            Malnutrition may be present.
                                                            Tests: Electrolytes, consider PT/PTT.

                                Renal                       Renal insufficiency/failure may be present, especially in elderly and/or chronically ill
                                                            patients and in those who are hypovolemic.
                                                            Tests: Consider BUN; Cr; electrolytes.

                                Laboratory                  CBC with differential; Plt count

                                Premedication               Standard premedication (see p. B-1). Consider H2-antagonists (e.g., ranitidine 50 mg iv 1 hr
                                                            preop), metoclopramide (10 mg iv 30 min preop; contraindicated in bowel obstruction/
                                                            perforation), and Na citrate (30 mL po 10 min preop).

===== PAGE 535 =====
Closure of Enteric Fistulae      535

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop analgesia. If postop epidural analgesia is planned, placement of
                   catheter prior to anesthetic induction is helpful to establish correct placement in the epidural space (accomplished
                   by injecting 5–7 mL of 2% lidocaine via the epidural catheter and confirming segmental block).

                    Induction               The patient with abdominal pathology is often at risk for pulmonary aspiration, and the
                                            trachea should be intubated with patient awake or after rapid-sequence iv induction with
                                            cricoid pressure. (See Rapid-Sequence Induction, p. B-5.) If patient is clinically hypovole-
                                            mic, restore intravascular volume (colloid, crystalloid, or blood products) prior to induc-
                                            tion and titrate induction dose of sedative/hypnotic agents.

                    Maintenance             Balanced anesthesia without N2O (see Standard Maintenance Techniques, p. B-3): Main-
                                            tain neuromuscular blockade based on nerve stimulator response. Place OG or NG tube to
                                            evacuate stomach contents.
                                            Combined epidural and GA: Local anesthetic (2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine
                                            5–15 mL initial dose, then 3–5 mL q 60 min) can be injected into the epidural catheter
                                            to provide both anesthesia and optimal surgical exposure (contracted bowel and muscle
                                            relaxation). A continuous infusion of local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine or 0.25% bupiva-
                                            caine) at 3–5 mL/h may be used in place of bolus redosing. Be prepared to treat hypoten-
                                            sion with fluid and vasopressors. GA is administered to supplement regional anesthesia
                                            and for amnesia. If epidural opiates are used for postop analgesia, a loading dose (e.g.,
                                            hydromorphone 0.5–1.0 mg) should be administered at least 1 h before the conclusion of
                                            surgery. Use of systemic analgesics may be minimized during this type of anesthetic with

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                            the benefit of decreasing the likelihood of postop respiratory depression.

                    Emergence               The decision to extubate at the end of surgery depends on the patient’s underlying cardiopul-
                                            monary status and the extent of the surgical procedure. Patients should be hemodynamically
                                            stable, warm, cooperative, and fully reversed from any muscle relaxants prior to extubation.
                                            If the above criteria are not met, consider postop ventilation in the ICU setting.

                    Blood and fluid         Anticipate large fluid shift.          Plts, FFP, and cryoprecipitate should be administered
                       requirements         IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                     according to lab tests (Plt count, PT, PTT, DIC screen,
                                            T&S, consider T&C                      thromboelastography [TEG]). Strive to maintain eu-
                                            NS/LR @ 10–15 mL/kg/h                  volemia based on estimated blood loss and fluid
                                            Fluid warmer                           shifts, HR, BP, UO, ABG, and invasive monitors when
                                                                                   used.

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        Invasive monitors, as indicated by patient’s sta-
                                            UO                                     tus. Prevent hypothermia: use forced-air warmer;
                                            ± Arterial line                        consider warming blanket, warming iv fluids, warm
                                            ± CVP/PA catheter                       room temperature, keeping patient covered until
                                            ± TEE                                   ready for prep, etc.

                    Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                            3 eyes

                    Complications           Hemorrhage                             Acute septic shock may require aggressive hemody-
                                            Sepsis                                 namic support; PA catheter or TEE may help guide
                                                                                   management in the unstable patient.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications           Sepsis
                                            Hemodynamic instability
                                            Atelectasis                            Pulmonary function abnormalities may persist for
                                            Hypoxemia                              1 wk postop (↓ vital capacity and ↓ FRC).
                                            VTE (see p. B-8)
                                            Hemorrhage
                                            Ileus
                                            PONV (see p. B-6)

===== PAGE 536 =====
536   c h a p t e r 7.3   Intestinal Surgery

                                Pain                      Epidural analgesia (see p. C-3).         Patient should be recovered in ICU or ward accus-
                                  management              PCA (see p. C-3).                        tomed to treating the side effects of epidural opiates
                                                                                                   (e.g., respiratory depression, breakthrough pain,
                                                                                                   nausea, pruritus).

                                Tests                     CBC; CXR (if central line placed);       Others as directed by intraop course.
                                                          electrolytes; glucose

                                Suggested Reading
                                  1. Becker HP, Willms A, Schwab R: Small bowel fistulas and the open abdomen. Scand J Surg 2007; 96:263–71.
        General Surgery

===== PAGE 537 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.4 Colorectal
                                            Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Andrew A. Shelton, MD
                                            Carlos E. Pineda, MD
                                            Mark Lane Welton, MD

                                            anesthesiologists
                                            Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD
                                            Alimorad G. Djalali, MD

===== PAGE 538 =====
ENHANCED RECOVERY AFTER SURGERY (ERAS)
                                Fast-track, or enhanced recovery programs after elective surgery incorporate a variety of evidence-based interven-
                                tions in an attempt to maintain normal physiologic function, enhance recovery, and prevent or minimize postopera-
                                tive complications. These interventions encompass all phases of a patient’s perioperative care from the preoperative
                                phase, to the intraoperative phase, and to the postoperative phase. These programs are being increasingly used in the
                                perioperative management of patients with colorectal conditions. The anesthesiologist is responsible for three key
                                elements in affecting outcomes after surgery: stress reactions to the surgery, fluid therapy, and analgesia. Common
                                components of ERAS programs are noted below.

                                 PREOP                                      INTRAOP                                     POSTOP

                                 Avoid preop fasting; allow clear liq-      Standard anesthetic protocol allowing       Minimize excessive postop fluids
                                   uids until 2 h before induction of         rapid awakening
                                   anesthesia

                                 Preoperative carbohydrate loading          Use of midthoracic epidural for open        Early resumption of enteral feeding
                                                                              surgery

                                 Avoid long-acting sedative medications     Prevention of PONV                          Prevention of postop ileus
                                   before surgery

                                 DVT prophylaxis with compression           Maintenance of intraoperative               Postop glucose control
        General Surgery

                                   stockings and LMWH                        normothermia

                                 Prophylactic antibiotics given 30–60 min Avoid excessive intraoperative fluids         Early mobilization
                                   before incision

                                 Avoid mechanical bowel prep                Use of laparoscopic surgical techniques     Avoid nasogastric tubes
                                                                                                                        Multimodality postop analgesia
                                                                                                                          minimizing narcotics

                                Several studies have demonstrated that the ERAS programs compared with traditional postoperative care are associ-
                                ated with earlier recovery and discharge after colorectal surgery with decreased morbidity.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, et al: Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: Enhanced Recovery
                                     After Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations. World J Surg 2013; 37(2):259–84.
                                  2. Lassen K, Soop M, Nygren J, et al: Consensus review of optimal perioperative care in colorectal surgery: Enhanced Recovery
                                     After Surgery (ERAS) Group recommendations. Arch Surg 2009; 144(10):961–9.
                                  3. Rossi G, Vaccarezza H, Vaccaro CA, et al: Two-day hospital stay after laparoscopic colorectal surgery under an Enhanced
                                     Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) pathway. World J Surg 2013; 37(10):2483–9.

                                LAPAROSCOPIC COLORECTAL SURGERY
                                Laparoscopic surgery has changed the face of general surgery with the widespread use of laparoscopic cholecys-
                                tectomy, appendectomy, and other surgical procedures. Although across the country many colorectal procedures
                                continue to be done in the standard open fashion, laparoscopic techniques are being used more and more for proce-
                                dures on the colon and rectum. All of the following procedures can be done, and have been done, laparoscopically.
                                Advantages to the patient include smaller incisions, less postop discomfort, a decreased in-hospital stay, decreased
                                wound-related complications with early return to work and normal activity. Steep positional changes are often used

                          538

===== PAGE 539 =====
Total Proctocolectomy         539

                   to facilitate retraction of the small bowel out of the operative field. The patient is often placed on a beanbag to prevent
                   movement. The term laparoscopic-assisted is more appropriate for colorectal procedures because the colon often is
                   mobilized laparoscopically. A small incision is then made, through which the bowel is exteriorized, the mesentery is
                   divided, and an anastomosis is created. “Hand-assisted” laparoscopy involves placement of a hand-port through a
                   5–10 cm incision. The abdominal cavity is then insufflated as in standard laparoscopy, but the surgeon’s hand is used
                   alongside the other laparoscopic instruments. Laparoscopic techniques continue to advance with the development
                   of single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) for resection of the colon and rectum; natural orifice transluminal
                   endoscopic surgery (NOTES) techniques in which the resected specimen is removed from a natural orifice such as
                   the vagina; and the use of the da Vinci robot for the laparoscopic treatment of rectal cancer.
                   Laparoscopic resections of the colon or rectum are done using a pneumoperitoneum with its associated physiolog-
                   ic changes. Laparoscopic surgery involves the insufflation of carbon dioxide into the peritoneal cavity at a rate of
                   4–6 L/min to a pressure of 15–20 mm Hg. The raised intraabdominal pressure (IAP) and the effects of carbon diox-
                   ide can cause changes in the physiology of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Increased IAP affects venous
                   return, systemic vascular resistance, and myocardial function. Pneumoperitoneum also results in cephalad shift of
                   the diaphragm, decreasing the functional residual capacity, possibly to values less than the closing volume. This can
                   result in airway collapse, atelectasis V/Q mismatch, potential hypoxemia, and hypercarbia.
                   Because of the inability to use retractors as in open surgery, retraction of the bowel out of the operating field is usually
                   accomplished through changes in the patient’s position on the operating table, frequently in steep degrees of Tren-
                   delenburg position. Because of this, the patient must be secured to the operating table. These position changes can
                   further affect the cardiovascular and respiratory systems in addition to those caused by the pneumoperitoneum itself.
                   An important consideration for any laparoscopic procedure is that the surgeon might need to convert to an open
                   laparotomy. This may occur in a secondary fashion for failure to progress or in an emergent fashion for technical

                                                                                                                                                                General Surgery
                   difficulties.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bonjer HJ, Hop WC, Nelson H, et al: Laparoscopically assisted vs open colectomy for colon cancer: a meta-analysis. Arch
                        Surg 2007; 142(3):298–303.
                     2. Dwivedi A, Chahin F, Agrawal S, et al: Laparoscopic colectomy vs. open colectomy for sigmoid diverticular disease. Dis Colon
                        Rect 2002; 45(10):1309–14; discussion 1314–5.
                     3. Favuzza J, Delaney CP: Outcomes of discharge after elective laparoscopic colorectal surgery with transversus abdominis
                        plane blocks and enhanced recovery pathway. J Am Coll Surg 2013; 217(3):503–6.
                     4. Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa Healthcare,
                        New York: 2007.
                     5. Keshava A, Young CJ, Richardson GL, et al: A historical comparison of single incision and conventional multiport laparoscopic
                        right hemicolectomy. Colorectal Dis 2013; 15(10):e618–22.
                     6. Ky AJ, Sonoda T, Milsom JW: One-stage laparoscopic restorative proctocolectomy: an alternative to the conventional
                        approach. Dis Colon Rect 2002; 45(2):207–11.
                     7. Nishimura A, Kawahara M, Honda K, et al: Totally laparoscopic anterior resection with transvaginal assistance and
                        transvaginal specimen extraction: a technique for natural orifice surgery combined with reduced-port surgery. Surg Endosc
                        2013; 27(12):4734–40.
                     8. Perrin M, Fletcher A: Laparoscopic abdominal surgery: continuing education in anesthesia, critical care, and pain. 2004;
                        4(4):107–10.
                     9. Scheidbach H, Schneider C, Konradt J, et al: Laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection and anterior resection with curative
                        intent for carcinoma of the rectum. Surg Endo 2002; 16(1):7–13.

                   TOTAL PROCTOCOLECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A total proctocolectomy involves the removal of the entire colon, rectum, and anus (Fig. 7.4-1).
                   Indications for this operation include ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn’s disease (CD), and familial adenomatous polyposis
                    (FAP). Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) can be diagnosed at any age, but there are peaks in diagnosis in the teens and
                    twenties and the sixties and seventies. The most common indication for total proctocolectomy in the setting of UC

===== PAGE 540 =====
540   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                                                             Transverse colon

                                                                                                                      Splenic
                                                                                                                      flexure

                                                         Hepatic
                                                          flexure
                                                                                                                       Jejunum
                                                       Ascending
                                                           colon

                                                        IIeocecal                                                      Tenia
                                                            valve

                                                           Cecum

                                                           Terminal
                                                              ileum
                                                                                                                   Descending
                                                                      Appendix                                     colon
        General Surgery

                                                                                                        Sigmoid
                                                                           Rectum                       colon

                                          Figure 7.4-1. Anatomy of the colon. (Reproduced with permission from Hardy JD:
                                          Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Baltimore: 1988.)

                                or CD is intractable symptoms despite maximal medical therapy. Patients are commonly chronically or acutely
                                ill and may be malnourished or anemic. They are often on immunosuppressive drugs such as corticosteroids,
                                6-mercaptopurine or azathioprine, or biologic inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor alpha such as infliximab, adalim-
                                umab, or certolizumab. These medications all predispose these patients to an increased risk of postoperative infec-
                                tions and complications due to poor wound healing. Another important indication for proctocolectomy in patients
                                with UC is the presence of dysplasia or cancer.
                                FAP is an autosomal-dominant disease resulting in hereditary colon cancer. Patients develop hundreds to thousands
                                of adenomatous polyps throughout their colon and rectum, as well as elsewhere in the GI tract. Colorectal cancer
                                is inevitable unless proctocolectomy is performed. This is typically done in the late teens or twenties. In contrast to
                                patients with CD or UC, patients with FAP are usually healthy without other medical comorbidities.
                                Sequential compression stockings are used for thromboprophylaxis. Patients with CD and UC are at ↑ risk for the
                                development of DVT and should be given subcutaneous unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin.
                                Patients taking chronic corticosteroids are given stress-dose steroids before the procedure. Broad-spectrum antibiot-
                                ics covering gram-negative rods and anaerobes are given prior to the incision.
                                Total proctocolectomy with end ileostomy, total proctocolectomy with continent ileostomy (Koch pouch), and
                                restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA) all involve complete removal of the
                                colon and rectum, down to the level of the pelvic floor or levator ani muscles. They differ in the fate of the anal
                                canal, creation of a stoma, or construction of an anastomosis. The patient is placed in a lithotomy position in
                                padded Allen stirrups. A Foley catheter is placed. If the procedure is done using laparoscopic techniques, a small
                                incision is made in the periumbilical region, the suprapubic region, or as a Pfannenstiel incision to extract the
                                specimen. If done as an open procedure, it is commonly performed through a midline incision. The abdomen
                                is explored for evidence of unexpected malignancy or, in the case of FAP, for desmoid tumors. The right colon

===== PAGE 541 =====
Total Proctocolectomy    541

                   is mobilized first, and then the small bowel mesentery is mobilized to allow for creation of an ileostomy. The
                   transverse colon may be mobilized by separating it from the greater omentum, or the greater omentum may be re-
                   sected along with the specimen. The sigmoid and descending colon are mobilized, and the splenic flexure is taken
                   down. The ileum is then divided flush with the cecum, and the vessels in the colon mesentery are ligated. At this
                   point, the entire abdominal colon has been resected. An avascular fascial envelope surrounds the rectum and its
                   mesentery, the mesorectum. It is possible to circumferentially dissect the rectum down to the level of the pelvic
                   floor without ligating any vessels. There may be significant blood loss if an inadvertent injury to the spleen occurs
                   during mobilization of the splenic flexure. Massive blood loss may occur if the presacral venous plexus is entered
                   during posterior rectal mobilization.
                   Total proctocolectomy with ileostomy: For patients with CD, elderly patients with UC, or FAP patients with
                   low rectal cancer, complete removal of the colon, rectum, and anus is the procedure of choice. After completing the
                   abdominal mobilization of the colon and rectum, the perineal phase of the operation begins. Ideally, two teams of
                   surgeons participate in the operation simultaneously. The abdominal surgeon can create the ileostomy and close the
                   abdomen, while the perineal surgeon finishes removal of the rectum and anus. A circumferential incision is made
                   at the anal verge, and the intersphincteric plane is identified. The dissection proceeds cephalad until the abdominal
                   dissection is encountered, and the specimen is removed. The levator ani muscle, external anal sphincter, and skin
                   are closed. While this is being done, the abdominal surgeon makes a circular incision over the previously marked
                   ileostomy site. A muscle-splitting incision is carried through the rectus fascia. The terminal ileum is then brought
                   through this site. After the fascia and skin are closed, the ileostomy is matured. Some surgeons prefer to do the
                   perineal phase of a proctocolectomy in the prone jackknife position. In this case, after completing the abdominal
                   phase of the operation, the abdomen is closed, the stoma is matured, and the patient is flipped prone to finish the
                   procedure.

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                   Total proctocolectomy with continent ileostomy (Koch Pouch): Because of frequent complications and the
                   development of alternative procedures (see below) this procedure has been largely abandoned
                   Restorative proctocolectomy with ileal J pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA): IPAA is the procedure most per-
                   formed for patients with FAP and UC. In this operation, the colon and rectum are removed, down to the level of the
                   pelvic floor; however, the anal canal and anal sphincter complex are preserved. The rectum is stapled and divided at
                   the level of the surgical anal canal, ~1–1.5 cm above the dentate line. An ileal reservoir is constructed by anastomos-
                   ing the distal 30 cm of ileum in a side-to-side fashion, creating a J pouch. The apex of the pouch is then anastomosed
                   to the anal canal using a circular stapling device. Rarely, a hand-sewn anastomosis is created. A temporary diverting
                   loop ileostomy may or may not be created, depending on the clinical situation.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Total Proctocolectomy                 IPAA                            Laparoscopic
                    Position               Modified lithotomy                    ⇐                               ⇐
                    Incision               Midline                               Midline                         Suprapubic or Pfannenstiel
                    Special instruments    Two-table setup (separate abdomi-     Two-table setup; anal           ⇐
                                           nal and perineal instruments); deep   retractors
                                           pelvic instruments
                    Unique                 Patients frequently on chronic       Plus, epinephrine solutions     ⇐
                      considerations       corticosteroids                       injected under the rectal
                                                                                 mucosa to facilitate
                                                                                 dissection of reduce bleeding
                    Antibiotics            3–4 h                                 3–4 h                           4–5 h
                    Closing                Ileostomy completed after skin        Temporary ileostomy             ⇐
                      considerations       closed (15–30 min)                    commonly used, completed
                                                                                 after skin closure
                    EBL                    100–1000 mL (Most blood loss dur-     ⇐                               ⇐
                                           ing pelvic and perineal dissection)
                    Postop care            Transient inability to void common    Small bowel mesentery length-   ⇐
                                                                                 ened by dissection around
                                                                                 duodenum. May lead to PONV;
                                                                                 transient inability to void

===== PAGE 542 =====
542   c h a p t e r 7.4    Colorectal Surgery

                                  ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                 Morbidity                Dyspareunia 30%                         5–10%                             ⇐
                                                          Stoma complications 20%                NA
                                                          SBO 10–15%                              ⇐
                                                          Erectile dysfunction 2–4%               ⇐
                                                                                                  Nocturnal incontinence
                                                                                                  Poor function 5%
                                                                                                  Pelvic sepsis 0–4%
                                 Mortality                2–5% (older patients and those          < 1%                              ⇐
                                                          with underlying chronic medical
                                                          problems)
                                 Pain score               8                                       8                                 6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                                              Ulcerative Colitis                                     Familial Adenomatous Polyposis

                                 Age range                    3rd–5th decade                                          2nd–4th decade

                                 Male:Female                  1:1                                                     ⇐

                                 Incidence                    6–10/100,000                                            100–150 cases/yr
        General Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Large Bowel Surgery, p. 546.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Bertario L, Arrigoni A, Astel H, et al: Recommendations for clinical management of familial adenomatous polyposis. Tumori
                                     1997; 83(5):800–3.
                                  2. Ghosh S, Shand A, Ferguson A: Ulcerative colitis. BMJ 2000; 320(7242):1119–23.
                                  3. Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa Healthcare,
                                     New York: 2007.
                                  4. Guy TS, Williams NN, Rosato EF: Crohn’s disease of the colon. Surg Clin North Am 2001; 81(1):159–68, ix.
                                  5. Katz JA: Medical and surgical management of severe colitis. Sem Gastrointest Dis 2002; 11(1):18–32.
                                  6. King JE, Dozois RR, Lindor NM, et al: Care of patients and their families with familial adenomatous polyposis. Mayo Clin
                                     Proc 2000; 75(1):57–67.
                                  7. Litle VR, Barbour S, Schrock TR, et al: The continent ileostomy: long-term durability and patient satisfaction. J Gastrointest
                                     Surg 1999; 3(6):625–32.
                                  8. Metcalf AM: Elective and emergent operative management of ulcerative colitis. Surg Clin North Am 2007; 87(3):633–41.
                                  9. Michelassi F, Hurst R: Restorative proctocolectomy with J-pouch ileoanal anastomosis. Arch Surg 2000; 135(3):347–53.
                                 10. Sagar PM, Pemberton JH: Intraoperative, postoperative and reoperative problems with ileoanal pouches. Br J Surg 2012;
                                     99(4):454–68.
                                 11. Schiessling S, Leowardi C, Kienle P, et al: Laparoscopic versus conventional ileoanal pouch procedure in patients undergoing
                                     elective restorative proctocolectomy (LapConPouch Trial)—a randomized controlled trial. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2013;
                                     398(6):807–16.
                                 12. Sica GS, Biancone L: Surgery for inflammatory bowel disease in the era of laparoscopy. World J Gastroenterol 2013;
                                     19(16):2445–8.
                                 13. Wolff BG, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, et al, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery. Springer Science-
                                     Business Media, New York: 2007.

                                SEGMENTAL (PARTIAL) COLECTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Segmental colectomy involves removal of a portion of the colon (Fig. 7.4-1) with the creation of an
                                anastomosis or a stoma. The most common indications for the operation in the Western world are colon cancer
                                and diverticulitis. Less-common indications include traumatic perforation, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, ischemic

===== PAGE 543 =====
Segmental (Partial) Colectomy        543

                   colitis, volvulus, and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Both colon cancer and diverticular disease occur most com-
                   monly in patients > 50 yr. Patients may have any of the comorbid medical conditions associated with aging, as well as
                   complications related to the disease requiring colon resection. Free perforation of the colon can occur from a variety
                   of conditions, including diverticulitis, cancer, and ischemia. Patients may be hypovolemic and have systemic sepsis.
                   Emergent laparotomy should follow a period of resuscitation and administration of antibiotics. The involved seg-
                   ment of bowel is resected, the abdomen is irrigated, and a stoma is created.
                   Colon cancer is the second most common cancer in the United States with 153,000 new cases diagnosed annually.
                   Patients may be completely asymptomatic, with the Dx being made only as the result of a screening exam. Because
                   of the large caliber of the colon and the liquid nature of stool, patients with cancers of the right colon are more likely
                   to present with large cancers and anemia. The caliber of the left colon is smaller and the stool more solid. Symptoms
                   of obstruction and change in bowel habits predominate for left-sided lesions.
                   Colonic diverticula occur in up to 60–70% of people > 50 yr in the United States. A colonic diverticulum is a hernia-
                   tion of the mucosa and submucosa through the relative weakening that occurs in the muscular wall of the bowel
                   at the site of penetrating blood vessels. This occurs predominantly in the sigmoid colon. Most people with colonic
                   diverticula are completely asymptomatic and will never experience any complications related to diverticulosis. Di-
                   verticulitis occurs when a microscopic or macroscopic perforation of a colonic diverticulum occurs, resulting in a
                   pericolonic inflammatory and infectious process. The severity of the attack depends on the degree of perforation and
                   how well the body is able to wall it off. This ranges from minor inflammation around the sigmoid colon that can be
                   managed with antibiotics, to an intraabdominal or pelvic abscess requiring percutaneous drainage, to free perfora-
                   tion with purulent or feculent peritonitis requiring emergency surgery. Repeated bouts of diverticulitis eventually
                   can result in fibrosis of the colon, stricture formation, and obstruction.
                   Ideally, surgery on the colon is performed in an elective setting; however, perforation with peritonitis or complete

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   obstruction of the colon may require emergency surgery. Most patients presenting for elective colon resection un-
                   dergo preop bowel preparation that consists of mechanical cleaning of the colon. As a result, they are frequently
                   hypovolemic and hypokalemic when they come to the OR. Recent randomized controlled trials have not shown a
                   benefit of mechanical bowel prep, and for this reason, many surgeons are abandoning this as a routine practice The
                   patient is positioned either supine or in the modified lithotomy position, depending on the segment of colon to be
                   removed. Sequential compression stockings are used for thromboprophylaxis and chemoprophylaxis for DVT with
                   either unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin is given. Intravenous antibiotics covering gram-neg-
                   ative rods and anaerobes should be given prior to the incision with redosing as appropriate for the antibiotic used.
                   Segmental colectomy: Segmental resection of the colon maybe performed laparoscopically or via midline
                   or transverse abdominal incisions, depending on the underlying disease, portion of the colon to be resected, and
                   the surgeon’s preference. In general, midline incisions are preferred when: a high-lying splenic flexure must be
                   mobilized, IBD is present, or the extent of the colon resection is not known preoperatively. Transverse incisions
                   are most commonly reserved for resections of the right colon. The most commonly performed partial colon re-
                   sections are right hemicolectomy, sigmoid colectomy, left hemicolectomy, and abdominal colectomy with
                   an ileorectal anastomosis. The sequence of steps in a partial colectomy is the same for all parts of the colon.
                   The right colon and left colon are retroperitoneal structures; whereas, the transverse colon and sigmoid colon are
                   primarily intraperitoneal. The first step is mobilization of the colon and its mesentery. Care must be taken not to
                   injure the left ureter during mobilization of the sigmoid colon or the duodenum during mobilization of the right
                   colon. Proximal and distal sites for resection are selected, and the intervening mesentery is divided. The anasto-
                   mosis may be hand sewn or stapled, which is a decision based primarily on the surgeon’s preference.
                   There is no clear advantage to either anastomotic technique. Creation of a diverting stoma rather than an anasto-
                   mosis may be necessary in patients who are hemodynamically unstable, or when intraabdominal conditions, such as
                   inflammation, make an anastomosis unsafe. There may be significant blood loss if an inadvertent injury to the spleen
                   occurs during mobilization of the splenic flexure. Excessive traction of the hepatic flexure can result in difficult-to-
                   control venous bleeding.
                   Obstruction of the colon most commonly occurs as a result of cancer of the sigmoid colon or repeated bouts of
                   diverticulitis. Patients present with abdominal distention, obstipation, and N/V. Patients are treated with NG tube
                   decompression and correction of hypovolemia. An attempt may be made to stent the obstructing lesion endoscopi-
                   cally preop to allow decompression and preparation of the colon. If this is not possible, surgical options include seg-
                   mental resection with a colostomy, segmental resection with primary anastomosis, and an on-table colonic lavage,
                   or subtotal colectomy with an ileorectal anastomosis.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Colon cancer, diverticular disease, Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, trauma, ischemic
                   colitis, lower GI hemorrhage, intractable constipation, colon volvulus

===== PAGE 544 =====
544   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine or modified lithotomy

                                 Incision                Transverse or vertical midline

                                 Unique                  Bowel prep, or underlying disease may → dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities or anemia.
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Ertapenem 1 g iv or 2nd generation cephalosporin

                                 Surgical time           1–3 h

                                 Closing                 Colostomy or ileostomy matured after wound is closed (requires 10–20 min).
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     100–300 mL (500–2000 mL if splenic injury, loss of major vascular pedicle, or repeat operation
                                                         for cancer, Crohn’s disease)

                                 Postop care             ICU for underlying disease; NG tube for distention or vomiting. Avoid use of long-lasting anticho-
                                                         linergics effects.

                                 Mortality               0.5–2% (mostly related to underlying disease)

                                 Morbidity               SBO: 5–10%
                                                         Wound infection: 4–10%
                                                         Anastomotic leak: 2–4%
                                                         Wound dehiscence: 1–2%
        General Surgery

                                                         Bleeding: 1%
                                                         Splenic injury: 1%

                                 Pain score              8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                                         Crohn’s Disease             Colon Cancer           Trauma                    Diverticula

                                 Age range               2nd–4th decade              5th–7th decade         2nd–4th decade            > 40 yr

                                 Male:Female             1:1                         1.3:1                  3:1                       1:1

                                 Incidence               1–6/100,000                 30/100,000             1–2/100,000               10/100,000

                                 Etiology                Unknown                     Genetic: 5%            Trauma                    Western countries:
                                                                                                                                      low-fiber diet

                                 Associated              Malnutrition; anemia;       Iron deficiency;       Liver fracture; spleen    Hemorrhoids; chronic
                                   conditions            intraabdominal sep-         colonic                fracture; rib frac-       constipation
                                                         sis; intestinal fistulae;   obstruction;           ture; closed-head
                                                         perianal disease;           colonic                injury; penetration of
                                                         nephrolithiasis;            perforation            viscera adjacent to
                                                         sclerosing and anky-                               colon injury
                                                         losing spondylitis

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Large Bowel Surgery, p. 546.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Blair NP, Germann E: Surgical management of acute sigmoid diverticulitis. Am J Surg 2002; 183(5):525–8.
                                  2. Colquhoun PH, Wexner SD: Surgical management of colon cancer. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2002; 4(5):414–9.
                                  3. Gordon, PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa
                                     Healthcare, New York: 2007.
                                  4. Greer LT, Gillern SM, Vertrees AE: Evolving colon injury management: a review. Am Surg 2013; 79(2):119–27.

===== PAGE 545 =====
Stoma Closure or Peristomal Hernia Repair            545

                     5. Makela J, Kiviniemi H, Laitinen S: Prevalence of perforated sigmoid diverticulitis is increasing. Dis Colon Rect 2002;
                        45(7):955–61.
                     6. Mathis KL, Boostrom SY, Pemberton JH: New developments in colorectal surgery. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2013; 29(1):72–8.
                     7. Wolff BG, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, et al, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery. Springer Science-
                        Business Media, New York: 2007.

                   STOMA CLOSURE OR PERISTOMAL HERNIA REPAIR
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: A temporary colostomy or ileostomy can be made for a variety of staged procedures. An end colos-
                   tomy is often created after resection of obstructing or perforated lesions of the left colon. A proximal loop ileostomy
                   or colostomy is often created to protect a “high-risk” anastomosis, such as a low pelvic colorectal or ileoanal anas-
                   tomosis. A patient with a permanent stoma may develop a hernia at the stoma site. This may result in complications,
                   such as obstruction or strangulation of the bowel, or problems with appropriate fitting of the stoma appliance. The
                   extent of procedure depends on the type of stoma created.
                   Closure of loop stoma: Closure of a loop stoma is performed through a circular incision, placed just outside the
                   mucocutaneous junction of the stoma and the skin. The proximal and distal ends of the bowel are separated from
                   the subcutaneous tissue and anterior fascia and then the posterior fascia. The bowel is cleaned of adherent skin, and
                   the previously opened antimesenteric border of the bowel is simply closed with sutures. Alternatively, the previously
                   exteriorized portion of bowel is resected, and the two ends are anastomosed with sutures or staples. On rare occa-

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                   sions, it is necessary to extend the incision transversely through the abdominal wall to safely perform an anastomosis.
                   The fascia is closed in the standard fashion. Loop ileostomies are most commonly performed for patients who have
                   had surgery for rectal cancer and who have a low colorectal anastomosis. These patients have frequently received
                   chemotherapy and radiation therapy. A loop ileostomy is also created as part of a restorative proctocolectomy with
                   an ileal J pouch anal anastomosis. These patients tend to be significantly younger. They may have only recently been
                   weaned off chronic glucocorticoid therapy and may require stress dose steroids as part of the procedure.
                   Closure of end stoma: Closure of an end stoma usually requires a midline abdominal incision. After entering the
                   peritoneal cavity, the stoma is freed from the abdominal wall. The most common indication for closure of an end
                   colostomy is restoration of intestinal continuity after emergent surgery for perforated diverticulitis or an obstructing
                   rectal cancer. The severity and indication for the original procedure can have a significant impact on the difficulty of
                   the colostomy takedown. Not infrequently, this procedure begins with cystoscopy and placement of bilateral ure-
                   teral stents by a urologist given the risk of ureteral injury in reoperative pelvic surgery. Adhesions are lysed, and
                   the dysfunctional distal bowel is identified. It may be necessary to mobilize the proximal bowel to provide a tension-
                   free anastomosis. An anastomosis can then be created using either hand-sewn or stapled techniques.
                   Paracolostomy hernia repair: The abdomen may be entered via a midline or a peristomal incision. The stoma
                   is freed from the abdominal wall and hernia sac. The stoma is then moved to an alternate site, and the defect in the
                   abdominal wall is closed. Alternatively, the stoma may be left in its original site and the fascia closed around the
                    bowel that then may be reinforced with biologic or prosthetic mesh. When performed laparoscopically, transfascial
                    sutures and tackers are used to hold the mesh in place. These may cause significant postop pain.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                               Repair of Parastomal
                                             Closure of Loop Stoma            Closure of End Stoma             Hernia

                     Position                Supine                           Modified lithotomy               Supine

                     Incision                Circumstomal                     Midline                          Midline or circumstomal

                     Special instruments     Anastomotic staplers             Anastomotic staplers; may        Prosthetic or biologic mesh
                                                                              undergo cystoscopy and
                                                                              stents before procedure

===== PAGE 546 =====
546   c h a p t e r 7.4    Colorectal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                                                   Repair of Parastomal
                                                           Closure of Loop Stoma              Closure of End Stoma                 Hernia

                                 Antibiotics               Ertapenem 1 mg iv or second        ⇐                                    ⇐
                                                           generation cephalosporin

                                 Surgical time             45 min to 1.5 h                    1.5–3 h                              Same

                                 Closing                   Requires only a few fascial su-    Paralysis for closure of mid-        Stoma matured after fascial
                                   Considerations          tures; skin may be left open       line fascial incision and stoma      and skin closure if it is relo-
                                                                                              site                                 cated to a new site

                                 EBL                       25 cc                              100–500 cc                           < 100 cc

                                 Mortality                 < 1%                               1–3%                                 1%

                                 Morbidity                 Anastomotic leak                   ⇐                                    Recurrent hernia formation
                                                           SBO
                                                           Wound infection

                                 Pain score                5                                  8                                    6

                                 ■■ PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
        General Surgery

                                                                                                                                  Repair of Parastomal
                                                  Closure of Loop Stoma                      Closure of End Stoma                 Hernia

                                 Age range        Variable; older for patient with cancer,   Variable; tend to be older           ⇐
                                                  younger for patients with IBD
                                 Male:Female      1:1                                        ⇐                                    ⇐
                                 Etiology         Protection of anastomosis after            Prior emergent surgery for           Prior surgery for rectal cancer,
                                                  surgery for rectal cancer; IBD; or as      colon perforation with peritoni-     or inflammatory bowel disease
                                                  treatment of an anastomotic leak           tis or obstruction
                                 Associated       Colorectal cancer, ulcerative colitis,     Colorectal cancer, diverticulitis,   Colorectal cancer, Crohn’s dis-
                                   conditions     diverticulitis                             trauma                               ease, ulcerative colitis

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Ghorra SG, Rzeczycki TP, Natarajan R, et al: Colostomy closure: impact of preoperative risk factors on morbidity. Am Surgeon
                                     1999; 65(3):266–9.
                                  2. Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa Healthcare,
                                     New York: 2007.
                                  3. Kaiser AM, Israelit S, Klaristenfeld D, et al: Morbidity of ostomy takedown. J Gastrointest Surg 2008; 12(3):437–41.
                                  4. Sajid MS, Craciunas L, Baig MK, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of published, randomized, controlled trials
                                     comparing suture anastomosis to stapled anastomosis for ileostomy closure. Tech Coloproctol 2013; 17(6):631–9.
                                  5. Shah NR, Craft RO, Harold KL: Parastomal hernia repair. Surg Clin North Am 2013; 93(5):1185–98.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR LARGE BOWEL SURGERY
                                (Procedures covered: total proctocolectomy; partial colectomy with anastomosis; colostomy; stoma closure
                                and peristomal hernia repair)

                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients undergoing colorectal procedures present a heterogeneous group regarding their age, nature of the disease,
                                and implications of the surgery. Indications for large bowel surgery include cancer and inflammatory bowel disease
                                (IBD), both of which can be elective and emergent.

===== PAGE 547 =====
Stoma Closure or Peristomal Hernia Repair            547

                    Respiratory             In addition to the common pulmonary diseases such as COPD, asthma, chronic bronchitis,
                                            restrictive lung disease, etc., patients with IBD may have inflammatory lung involvement
                                            with frequently negligible clinical consequences.
                                            In emergent cases due to obstruction, perforation, or peritonitis (metabolic acidosis, elec-
                                            trolytes abnormalities), pain, cramping, and distention are the predominate features. Lim-
                                            ited diaphragmatic excursion (↓ TV, ↓ FRC) leads to rapid desaturation after induction. In
                                            cases of large bowel obstruction, sufficient preoxygenation and RSI are advisable. In addi-
                                            tion, patients with IBD may have arthritis and reduced neck ROM.
                                            Tests: Electrolytes, ABG in septic cases.

                    Cardiovascular          Even in elective cases, hypovolemia 2° poor PO intake, vomiting, and diarrhea may be
                                            encountered. Antihypertensive drugs can exacerbate the problem (ACE-Inhibitors). Me-
                                            chanical bowel prep is rarely used nowadays.
                                            Hemodynamic instability is common in cases of sepsis and peritonitis (↑ HR, ↓ BP). Vaso-
                                            pressor agents may be indicated.
                                            Tests: ABG, ECG

                    Renal                   Electrolyte abnormalities 2° vomiting or gastric tube suctioning (metabolic alkalosis) are
                                            common. Diarrhea and mechanical bowel preparation can cause metabolic acidosis. Me-
                                            chanical bowel preparation is rarely utilized because it does not improve outcome.
                                            Tests: Electrolytes

                    Gastrointestinal        The majority of patients do not have any acute symptoms; some may have nausea or abdominal
                                            pain without noticeable implications for anesthesia. Patients with obstruction either have already

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                                            an indwelling NG tube or may benefit from decompression of the stomach. Risk of aspiration is
                                            prevalent requiring RSI. Pulling the NG tube before the induction of anesthesia is controversial.
                                            Patients with IBD may have hepatic function impairments and altered drug metabolism.

                    Hematologic             Chronic bowel inflammation and cancer often associated with chronic and at times acute GI
                                            blood loss. Look for anemia. Consider as well dehydration causing hemoconcentration which
                                            may mask anemia. Low albumin levels influence the amount of free circulating drugs in blood.
                                            Consider coagulopathy 2° malabsorption.
                                            Tests: CBC, PLTs, INR

                    Laboratory              CBC, BMP, T&S vs T&C. Other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication           Standard premedication (p. B-1) is usually appropriate. Patients with IBD on chronic
                                            steroid therapy should receive their usual daily dose of steroids throughout the periop
                                            period and may require full stress-dose steroids.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for intra- and postop analgesia provided there are no contraindications.
                   The majority of colorectal procedures are performed laparoscopically, with a relatively small incision for the hand-
                   port. The postoperative pain after laparoscopic cases can be treated with iv opioids in majority of patients. For
                   open procedures, thoracic epidural is associated with improved postoperative pain control, earlier return of bowel
                   function, early intake of food, and out-of-bed mobilization. Intraoperative use of low concentration bupivacaine or
                   ropivacaine blunts the surgical stress and reduces the intraoperative opioid requirements.

                    Induction               RSI with cricoid pressure should be performed for induction for patients with an acute abdo-
                                            men due to risk of pulmonary aspiration (p. B-5). An NG tube may not interfere with cricoid
                                            pressure and may be left in place or removed immediately prior to induction after suctioning
                                            as it may obscure the airway anatomy during laryngoscopy. If patient is clinically hypovole-
                                            mic, restoring intravascular volume (colloid, crystalloid) before induction may minimize hy-
                                            potension. Even with titration of induction agents in elderly patients or those with acute ab-
                                            domen/sepsis, profound hypotension may occur despite fluid resuscitation, requiring the use
                                            of pressors to blunt the effect of induction agents (relative hypovolemia). RSI is not indicated
                                            for elective patients, fasted patients, without other indications. Preop hypovolemia is less
                                            likely with liberalized NPO guidelines and move away from mechanical preop bowel preps.

===== PAGE 548 =====
548   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                Maintenance              Standard maintenance (p. B-3) without N2O. Combined epidural/GA: local anesthetic (e.g.,
                                                         0.125% bupivacaine 3–5 mL q 45–60 min or 1.5–2% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine 5–10
                                                         mL q 60–90 min) can be injected into the epidural catheter to provide both anesthesia and
                                                         optimal surgical exposure (contracted bowel and profound muscle relaxation). A continuous
                                                         infusion of local anesthetic (e.g., 0.125% bupivacaine at 4–8 mL/h may enhance hemodynamic
                                                         stability compared to bolus technique. A loading dose of epidural opiate (e.g., hydromorphone
                                                         0.4–0.8 mg) should be administered 1–2 h before conclusion of surgery. Patients receiving epi-
                                                         dural opiates should be monitored for development of delayed postop respiratory depression,
                                                         and systemic sedatives (e.g., opiates, benzodiazepines) should be minimized. If placed intraop-
                                                         eratively, gastric tubes are increasingly removed in the OR at the conclusion of surgery.

                                Emergence                The decision to extubate at the end of surgery depends on the patient’s volume status, un-
                                                         derlying cardiopulmonary status, and extent of surgical procedure. Patients should be he-
                                                         modynamically stable, warm, alert, and cooperative, and fully reversed from any muscle
                                                         relaxants before extubation and have adequate return of pulmonary function.

                                Blood and fluid          3rd-space losses may be significant     NS preferable to LR for fluid replacement in pa-
                                   requirements          in setting of acute abdomen and         tients with metabolic alkalosis.
                                                         systemically ill patients.              Maintain euvolemia based on EBL and estimates
                                                         18 ga iv for elective cases: consider   of fluid shifts, UO, HR, BP, base deficit, lab studies,
                                                         additional and larger ga for emer-      and invasive monitoring when used.
                                                         gency cases or hemodynamically
                                                         unstable patients.
                                                         NS/LR @ 5–10 mL/kg/h
        General Surgery

                                                         Warm fluids
                                                         Consider T&S or T&C

                                Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                                         UO
                                                         ± Arterial line                         Arterial line and CVP, as indicated by patient’s status.
                                                         ± CVP                                   Hypothermia may delay healing and predispose pa-
                                                         Temperature                             tients to wound infections. Avoid hypothermia with
                                                                                                 forced-air, warming blanket, warming room tem-
                                                                                                 perature, and keeping patient covered until ready for
                                                                                                 prep.

                                Positioning              Trendelenburg/reverse                   Both Trendelenburg and reverse Trendelenburg
                                                         Trendelenburg                           may be used during laparoscopic bowel surgery.
                                                         3± lithotomy and pad pressure          Position, pad, and secure patient accordingly.
                                                           points                                Arms usually tucked for laparoscopic cases.
                                                         3 eyes                                  3 IV access before draping.

                                Complications            Septic shock                            Hemodynamic instability 2° sepsis, hemorrhage, es-
                                                         Aspiration gastric contents             pecially during manipulation of necrotic bowel.
                                                         Hemorrhage
                                                         Injuries to spleen, bowel, and
                                                         ureters
                                                         Unresectability of tumor

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications            Atelectasis
                                                         Hemodynamic instability                 Patients may have considerable 3rd-space losses
                                                         Sepsis                                  that require invasive monitoring, ICU admission,
                                                         VTE (see Appendix B)                    vasopressors.
                                                         Injuries to bowel and ureters           If placed intraop, gastric tubes are often removed in
                                                         PONV (see Appendix B)                   the OR at the conclusion of surgery.

===== PAGE 549 =====
Operations for Rectal Prolapse           549

                    Pain                       Taylor regimen to individual and clinical circumstances and needs.
                      management               Consider preemptive analgesia: gabapentin 600 mg, acetaminophen, COX-2 inhibitors.
                                               Consider use of nonopiate adjuncts: NSAIDS, ketamine, GABA analogues (gabapentin,
                                               pregabalin), acetaminophen.
                                               Epidural analgesia (p. C-3)
                                               PCA (p. C-3)

                    Tests                      CBC; CXR (if central line placed),
                                               electrolytes, glucose

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Carli F, Mayo N, Klubien K, et al: Epidural analgesia enhances functional exercise capacity and health-related quality of life
                        after colonic surgery: results of a randomized trial. Anesthesiology 2002; 97(3):540–9.
                     2. Carli F, Trudel J, Belliveau P: The effect of intraoperative thoracic epidural anesthesia and postoperative analgesia on bowel
                        function after colorectal surgery: a prospective, randomized trial. Dis Colon Rect 2001; 44(8):1083–9.
                     3. Chestovich PJ, Lin AY, Yoo J: Fast-track pathways in colorectal surgery. Surg Clin North Am 2013; 93(1):21–32.
                     4. Eskicioglu C, Forbes SS, Fenech DS, et al: Preoperative bowel preparation for patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery:
                        a clinical practice guideline endorsed by the Canadian Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Can J Surg 2010; 53(6):385–95.
                     5. Hendren SK, Morris AM: Evaluating patients undergoing colorectal surgery to estimate and minimize morbidity and
                        mortality. Surg Clin North Am 2013; 93(1):1–20.
                     6. Lacy AM, Delgado S, Castells A, et al: The long-term results of a randomized clinical trial of laparoscopy-assisted versus open
                        surgery for colon cancer. Ann Surg 2008; 248:1–7.
                     7. Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B: Prophylactic nasogastric decompression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
                        2007; CDO04929.

                                                                                                                                                                  General Surgery
                     8. Richards ER, Kabir SI, McNaught CE, MacFie J: Effect of thoracic epidural anesthesia on splanchnic blood flow. BR J Surg
                        2013; 100(3):316–21.
                     9. Yong SL, Coulthard P, Wrzosek A: Supplemental perioperative steroids for surgical patients with adrenal insufficiency.
                        Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 12:CD005367.

                   OPERATIONS FOR RECTAL PROLAPSE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Rectal prolapse (procidentia) is intussusception of the full thickness of the rectal wall beyond the anal
                   canal. It must be distinguished from rectal mucosal prolapse, caused by elongation of the mucosal attachments to
                   the underlying sphincter muscle, and internal intussusception, where the upper rectum folds into the lower rectum,
                   but does not descend through the sphincter mechanism. Rectal mucosal prolapse is treated as part of the spectrum
                   of hemorrhoidal disease, and mild-to-moderate intussusception does not benefit from surgery. Procidentia is as-
                   sociated frequently with anal incontinence. The surgical approaches to procidentia are determined by patient age,
                   concurrent medical disease, sphincter function, and prior operative history, including previous abdominal surgery
                   and prior attempts at surgical repair. Surgical treatment of procidentia may be undertaken through an abdominal or
                   a perineal approach. Abdominal repair of rectal prolapse can be performed in either an open or laparoscopic fashion.
                   The abdominal approaches have a lower recurrence rate and because they do not diminish the capacity of the rec-
                   tal reservoir and are generally preferable for maintaining fecal continence. Rectopexy is an abdominal approach in
                   which the rectum is mobilized in the posterior plane from the sacral promontory to the levator muscles. The rectum
                   is then pulled cephalad and sutured to the presacral fascia with multiple nonabsorbable sutures, or tacked to the
                   presacral fascia using surgical tacks. Mesh may or may not be used to fix the rectum to the sacrum depending on the
                   operative preference of the surgeon. Many surgeons routinely perform sigmoid resection along with rectopexy. They
                   believe that removal of the redundant sigmoid further diminishes the chance of late recurrence and may alleviate
                   constipation. A number of approaches have been described, the most popular being the Ripstein procedure. Sling
                   procedures have equivalent recurrence rates, but higher complication rates. As in rectopexy, the rectum is mobilized
                   along the presacral plane down to the level of the levators. A band of Marlex mesh is sewn to the presacral fascia at the
                   sacral promontory, upward traction is placed on the rectum, and the mesh is sutured to the rectum. Transabdominal
                   repair of rectal prolapse is the favored approach for younger patients with rectal prolapse or older paints with few
                   medical comorbidities due to the significantly lower rate of recurrence of the prolapse.

===== PAGE 550 =====
550   c h a p t e r 7.4    Colorectal Surgery

                                Not uncommonly, however, patients with rectal prolapse are significantly advanced in age or have significant medical
                                comorbidities. In these higher risk patients, prolapse may be repaired via a perineal approach. The most common of
                                 these is perineal rectosigmoidectomy (or Altemeier procedure). The prolapsed rectum is withdrawn through the anal
                                 canal to its full extent, and a circumferential incision is made in the outer tube of the prolapsed bowel just proximal to the
                                 dentate line. This exposes the inner tube of prolapsed bowel and mesentery. Redundant bowel is mobilized from the distal
                                 end, up to the point that no additional bowel can be delivered into the operative field. The redundant bowel is transected,
                                 and a primary anastomosis is fashioned between the cut ends of the inner and outer bowel. Prior to anastomosis, the leva-
                                 tor muscles are often approximated in the midline in an effort to aid continence. When the volume of prolapsed tissue is
                                 small or a previous abdominal approach makes blood supply to the rectum questionable, the Delorme procedure often
                                 is performed. During this procedure, the mucosa is stripped off the prolapsed rectum, and the prolapsed rectal muscle
                                 is foreshortened by plication until it resides above the sphincters. Perineal repair of rectal prolapse is most commonly
                                 done under a general anesthetic as the patient is typically positioned prone, the procedure can take 60–90 min; and in the
                                 case of a perineal rectosigmoidectomy, the peritoneal cavity is entered. However, in very high risk patients for whom
                                 intubation or general anesthesia is a concern, the procedure can be done under an epidural, or local with sedation.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Full thickness rectal prolapse

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                    Rectopexy
                                                                                    with Sigmoid            Perineal                   Delorme
                                                           Rectopexy                Resection               Rectosigmoidectomy         Procedure

                                 Position                  Lithotomy                ⇐                       Prone jackknife;           ⇐
                                                                                                            lithotomy
        General Surgery

                                 Incision                  Low transverse; low      ⇐                       No external incision       ⇐
                                                           midline

                                 Special                   Deep pelvic instru-      Deep pelvic             Hip-roll for jackknife     Hip roll for jackknife
                                   instrumentation         ments; mesh if sling     instruments             position; anastomosis      position
                                                           planned                                          may be created with
                                                                                                            EEA stapler

                                 Unique                    Presacral venous         ⇐                       Epinephrine solutions      ⇐
                                   considerations          plexus bleeding may                              may be used to dimin-
                                                           occur; bowel prep                                ish bleeding; bowel
                                                           may cause dehydra-                               prep may cause dehy-
                                                           tion or hypokalemia.                             dration or hypokalemia.

                                 Antibiotics               Ertapenem 1 g iv         ⇐                       ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           or 2nd generation
                                                           cephalosporin

                                 Surgical time             1–2 h                    ⇐                       ⇐                          ⇐

                                 EBL                       < 100 mL; more if        100–300 mL; more        100–200 mL                 100 mL
                                                           reoperation              if reoperation

                                 Postop care               No rectal probes or      ⇐                       ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           medications

                                 Mortality                 0–2%                     0–4%                    1–4%                       0–1%

                                 Morbidity                 Rectal stricture (with   —                       —                          —
                                                           sling): 5–10%
                                                           Recurrent prolapse:      2–5%                    20–40%                     5–10%
                                                           2–8%
                                                           Pelvic infection: 5%     —                       —                          —
                                                                                    Anastomotic leak:       —                          —
                                                                                    2–4%

                                 Pain score                7                        7                       2                          2

===== PAGE 551 =====
Rectal Surgery      551

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 Women: peak incidence in 6th–7th decade; men: evenly distributed through age range

                     Male:Female               1:4

                     Incidence                 Unknown

                     Etiology                  Decreased pelvic muscular support; congenital deficiency of rectal support; pudendal neuropathy;
                                               chronic constipation and straining; multiparity; myelomeningocele; spina bifida; cystic fibrosis (chil-
                                               dren); acute parasitic diarrheal illness (children)

                     Associated                Fecal incontinence; urinary stress incontinence; rectocele; cystocele
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Fecal Incontinence, p. 559.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Fazeli MS, Kazemeini AR, Keshvari A, et al: Delorme’s procedure: an effective treatment for a full-thickness rectal prolapse
                        in young patients. Ann Coloproctol 2013; 29(2):60–5.
                     2. Magruder JT, Efron JE, Wick EC, et al: Laparoscopic rectopexy for rectal prolapse to reduce surgical-site infections and length
                        of stay. World J Surg 2013; 37(5):1110–4.
                     3. Mustain WC, Davenport DL, Parcells JP, et al: Abdominal versus perineal approach for treatment of rectal prolapse:

                                                                                                                                                                  General Surgery
                        comparable safety in a propensity-matched cohort. Am Surg 2013; 79(7):686–92.
                     4. Senapati A, Gray RG, Middleton LJ, et al: PROSPER: a randomised comparison of surgical treatments for rectal prolapse.
                        Colorectal Dis 2013; 15(7):858–68.

                   RECTAL SURGERY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Many lesions within the distal two-thirds of the rectum can be excised through a transanal approach
                   (Fig. 7.4-2). The most common benign tumors treated by local excision are adenomas. Lesions such as carcinoid
                   tumor, endometrioma, and solitary rectal ulcer also may be locally excised. Transanal excision of benign lesions may
                   be performed in the submucosal plane, whereas suspected malignancies are excised by removing the entire thickness
                   of the rectal wall. A full antibiotic and mechanical bowel prep is given. Transanal excision usually is performed in
                   the prone jackknife position, although the lithotomy position may be used when the lesion is located on the pos-
                   terior rectal wall. A local anal block, usually 0.25% bupivacaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine, is performed to relax
                   the sphincter mechanism and minimize sphincter injury, aid in hemostasis, and diminish postoperative pain. An
                   anoscope is inserted into the anal canal. Stay sutures may be placed adjacent to the area of resection. On occasion,
                   lesions may be prolapsed all the way through the anus and excised outside the body. Generally, the dissection starts
                   at the distal end of the lesion and proceeds proximally. The proctotomy may be closed with running or interrupted
                   sutures. These sutures are then grasped and used for further traction. When the specimen is removed, a few final
                   sutures are needed to close the proximal-most incision. Rigid proctoscopy is performed to confirm preservation of
                   an adequate lumen.

                         VARIANT PROCEDURE OR APPROACHES
                   TEM: A recently developed technique for the removal of larger lesions or lesions more proximally located in the
                   rectum is Transanal Endoscopic Microsurgery (TEM). In this technique, the patient is placed on the operating
                   table in a position that puts the lesion to be removed posterior. Because of this, the patient may be prone, supine
                   in lithotomy, or in the right or left lateral decubitus position. The procedure is performed through a larger operat-
                   ing proctoscope that is secured to the operating table. The colon is insufflated using carbon dioxide to provide an

===== PAGE 552 =====
552   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                          Figure 7.4-2. Anorectal anatomy with important landmarks. Approximate measure
                                          ments are relative to the anal verge. D = deep; S = superficial; Sc = subcutaneous; AR =
        General Surgery

                                          anorectal ring; ATZ = anal transition zone. (Reproduced with permission from Yahanda
                                          AM, Chang AE: Colorectal cancer. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT,
                                          et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                          Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                operating space. The carbon dioxide will be absorbed through the mucosa of the colon and be exhaled. Laparoscopic
                                like instruments are passed through the proctoscope, and the surgeon views the operation either through a stereo
                                viewer attached to the proctoscope or on a video screen. The lesion in question is removed and the defect in the
                                rectum sutured closed.
                                Transsacral: The transsacral (Kraske) approach to rectal tumors offers wider exposure than the transanal
                                approach, but is more painful and has a substantially greater likelihood of complications (wound infection, fecal
                                 fistula, incontinence). A transsacral approach may be advantageous when the lesion is located behind the rectum
                                 (retrorectal tumors) and when resection of the lower sacrum or coccyx is anticipated. Transsacral resection gener-
                                 ally is performed in the prone jackknife position. An incision is made from the posterior commissure of the anus to
                                 the base of the sacrum. The sphincter muscles are spared, but the levator muscles are divided to expose the posterior
                                 wall of the rectum. The coccyx may be disarticulated and removed to improve exposure. It is also possible to remove
                                 the lower sacral segments through this approach, but increasing morbidity accrues as the sacral nerve roots are sac-
                                 rificed. For a posterior-wall lesion, the posterior wall of the rectum is opened, and the lesion, along with a full-thick-
                                 ness disc of rectal wall, is excised. If the lesion is on the anterior wall, two proctotomy incisions are necessary. The
                                 proctotomy incisions are closed with standard anastomotic techniques. The levator muscles are reapproximated, and
                                 the skin is closed. A drain may be placed within the retrorectal space before closing. The transsacral approach may
                                 be combined with an abdominal approach (abdominal-transsacral resection) in some cases of low rectal cancer.
                                Transsphincteric: The transsphincteric (York-Mason) approach to rectal lesions also gives wider exposure than
                                does the transanal approach, but at the expense of a substantially greater risk of fecal incontinence. Transsphincteric
                                excision is performed with the patient in the prone jackknife position. An incision is made at the posterior commis-
                                sure of the anus and is extended along the lateral border of the coccyx and sacrum. The external sphincter, internal
                                sphincter, and levator ani muscles are sequentially transected in the posterior midline. As each muscle is cut, the
                                cut edges are tagged with sutures to facilitate accurate reapproximation. The rectal wall is incised, and the lesion is
                                excised. The proctotomy incision is closed via standard anastomotic suturing techniques, and the individual compo-
                                nents of the sphincter muscle are reapproximated with interrupted sutures. The overlying skin is closed in a standard
                                fashion.

===== PAGE 553 =====
Rectal Surgery     553

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                     Transanal
                                                                  Transsacral               Transsphincteric         Endoscopic
                                         Transanal Excision       Excision                  Excision                 Microsurgery

                     Position            Prone jackknife or       Prone jackknife           ⇐                        Prone jackknife,
                                         lithotomy                                                                   lithotomy, or lateral
                                                                                                                     decubitus

                     Incision            Intrarectal              Anus-to-lateral sacral    ⇐                        Intrarectal
                                                                  wall

                     Special             Rigid proctoscope;       Gigli or power saw        Headlight and/or         Proctoscope (40 mm
                       instrumentation   headlight and/or         if sacral resection       fiberoptic retractors;   diameter), removable
                                         fiberoptic retractors;   contemplated; head-       Foley catheter           faceplate, optical
                                         Foley catheter           light and/or fiberoptic                            stereoscope, light
                                                                  retractors; Foley                                  cord, pressure trans-
                                                                  catheter                                           ducer, laparoscopic
                                                                                                                     camera, insufflator,
                                                                                                                     instruments (5 mm
                                                                                                                     diameter), Martin arm
                                                                                                                     to hold equipment

                     Unique              Bowel prep may           ⇐                         ⇐                        ⇐
                       considerations    → dehydration and
                                         hypokalemia.

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                     Antibiotics         Ertapenem 1 g iv         ⇐                         ⇐                        ⇐
                                         or 2nd generation
                                         cephalosporin

                     Surgical time       15–120 min               1–2 h                     ⇐                        ⇐

                     EBL                 < 100 mL                 < 100 mL (500 mL if       ⇐                        ⇐
                                                                  sacral resection)

                     Postop care         No rectal tempera-       ⇐                         ⇐                        ⇐
                                         tures, suppositories,
                                         or enemas

                     Mortality           0–2%                     ⇐                         ⇐                        0.3–2%

                     Morbidity           Tumor recurrence:        50%                       5–50%                    4–20%
                                         5–50%
                                         Urinary retention:       ⇐                         ⇐                        ⇐
                                         10–20%
                                         Bleeding: 2–5%           ⇐                         ⇐                        2%
                                         Pelvic sepsis: 0–4%      ⇐                         ⇐                        0.8%
                                         Ureteral injury: < 1%    ⇐                         ⇐                        Intraperitoneal entry:
                                         (minimized by use of                                                        1–4%
                                         Foley)
                                                                  Fecal fistula: 10–30%
                                                                  Fecal incontinence:       10–40%                   2%
                                                                  5–10%

                     Pain score          3                        7                         7                        3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range           Rectal adenomas: 5th–7th decades; rectal adenocarcinoma: 6th–9th decades; endometrioma: 2nd–
                                         4th decades; solitary rectal ulcer syndrome: 4th–8th decades; carcinoid tumors: 5th–8th decades

                     Male: Female        1:1

===== PAGE 554 =====
554   c h a p t e r 7.4    Colorectal Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                                 Incidence                 Varies with disease; not uncommon

                                 Etiology                  Varies with disease

                                 Associated                Preexisting anorectal pathology, such as fecal incontinence, may require concurrent treatment
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Fecal Incontinence, p. 559.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Cataldo PA: Transanal endoscopic microsurgery. Surg Clin North Am 2006; 86(4):915–25.
                                  2. Chapuis P, Bokey L, Fahrer M, et al: Mobilization of the rectum: anatomic concepts and the bookshelf revisited. Dis Colon
                                     Rect 2002; 45(1):1–9.
                                  3. Glimelius BL: The role of preoperative and postoperative radiotherapy in rectal cancer. Clin Colorect Can 2002; 2(2):82–92.
                                  4. Kapiteijn E, van de Velde CJ: Developments and quality assurance in rectal cancer surgery. Euro J Cancer 2002; 38(7):919–36.
                                  5. Moore HG, Guillem JG: Local therapy for rectal cancer. Surg Clin North Am 2002; 82(5):967–81.
                                  6. Richards ER, Kabir SI, McNaught CE, MacFie J: Effect of thoracic epidural anaesthesia on splanchnic blood flow. Br J Surg
                                     2013 Feb; 100(3):316–21.
                                  7. Wolff BG, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, et al, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery. Springer Science-
                                     Business Media, New York: 2007.
        General Surgery

                                ANORECTAL SURGERY
                                       GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Anorectal procedures are common general surgical operative procedures. The most common anorectal procedures
                                are done for symptomatic hemorrhoids, perianal abscesses and fistulas, and anal fissures. Many of these procedures
                                can be accomplished under local anesthesia with an anal canal block. This provides anesthesia for the procedure and
                                also provides for postoperative pain control if a long-acting local anesthetic is used. Performing the block can be
                                painful and is usually performed in conjunction with sedation provided by the anesthesiologist. These procedures
                                can be more extensive, and reoperative procedures may require general anesthesia. Anorectal procedures can be
                                safely performed in the prone jackknife position as well as in the lithotomy position at the preference of the surgeon.
                                One of the most common complications after anorectal surgery is urinary retention. This fact should be kept in mind
                                when determining the volume of intravenous fluid to be given during the procedure.

                                SURGERY FOR ANAL FISTULAS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: The majority of perianal fistulae are due to infection in the anal glands within the rectal wall that com-
                                municates with crypts located at the dentate line (cryptoglandular fistula). Fistulae also may be the result of trauma,
                                Crohn’s disease, inflammatory processes within the peritoneal cavity, neoplasms, or as a consequence of radiation
                                therapy. The ultimate treatment of fistula-in-ano is determined by the etiology and the anatomic course of the fistula.
                                The principle behind treatment of cryptoglandular fistulae is to ablate the offending gland and lay open the tract.
                                Fistulae that track above the majority of the sphincter mechanism must be treated by procedures that either do not
                                cut the overlying sphincter, cut the sphincter and repair it, or cut the sphincter very gradually (seton, see below). A
                                fistula may be treated at the time of drainage of a perianal abscess or as a separate, elective operation. The route of

===== PAGE 555 =====
Surgery for Anal Fistulas   555

                   a fistula tract is best determined by exploration at the time of operation. Although local anesthesia is acceptable for
                   most fistulae, a few fistula operations require regional or general anesthesia because the ultimate route and depth
                   of the fistula is unknown. Special consideration is given to fistulae that arise in the setting of Crohn’s disease. Poor
                   wound healing and the importance of sphincter function in patients with chronic diarrhea dictate that only the most
                   superficial fistulae are laid open. The primary goal is palliation, specifically, abscess drainage and recurrence preven-
                   tion. This is often accomplished by placing a silastic seton (a ligature around sphincter muscles) around the fistula
                   tract and leaving it in place indefinitely. In the absence of active Crohn’s disease in the rectum and anus, attempts at
                   fistula cure may be undertaken.

                         VARIANT PROCEDURE OR APPROACHES
                   Fistulotomy: Fistulotomy involves cutting all tissues superficial to a fistula so that the fistula tract is brought
                   to the skin level. The opened, fibrotic fistula wall is often sewn to the skin edge (marsupialized). Fistulectomy
                   involves excision of the entire fistula tract. When conventional fistulotomy would cause incontinence, a seton
                   may be used. Other approaches that may be used to avoid fecal incontinence are complete fistulotomy with
                   immediate reconstruction of the sphincter and excision of the internal opening by an endorectal advancement
                   flap technique.
                   Fistula plug: The fistula plug involves the use of a bioabsorbable xenograft made of lyophilized porcine intes-
                   tinal submucosa that is reconstituted in saline and placed in the fistula tract. This method may be preferred
                   for fistulae that would require transection of a significant portion of the anal sphincters such that the surgeon
                   is concerned about the impact on continence. It is used for both cryptoglandular fistulas and Crohn’s disease-

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                   related fistulas.
                   Lift procedure: A LIFT procedure (ligation of the intersphincteric fistula tract) is a third technique used to treat
                   fistulas that cannot be treated by fistulotomy. An incision is made in the anatomic plane between the internal and
                   external sphincters. After the fistula tract is divided, the openings in the anal canal as well as in the internal and ex-
                   ternal anal sphincters are sutured closed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Fistula-in-ano

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Fistulotomy or          Fistulotomy with         Endorectal
                                             Fistulectomy            Seton                    Advancement Flap           Fistula Plug

                     Position                Prone jackknife;        ⇐                        Prone jackknife            ⇐
                                             rarely lithotomy

                     Incision                Perianal                ⇐                        ⇐                          None

                     Antibiotics             None                    None                     Ertapenem 1 g iv           None
                                                                                              or 2nd generation
                                                                                              cephalosporin

                     Surgical time           10–30 min               ⇐                        60–90 min                  5–10 min

                     EBL                     < 50 mL                 ⇐                        ⇐                          Negligible

                     Mortality               Minimal                 ⇐                        ⇐                          ⇐

                     Morbidity               Fecal incontinence:     10–30%                   0–10%                      0%
                                             0–30%
                                             Nonhealing, or recur-   10–20%. (This pro-       10–40%. (This pro-         25–50%
                                             rent fistula: 5%        cedure used only in      cedure used only in
                                                                     complex fistulae, so     complex fistulae, so
                                                                     complication rate        complication rate
                                                                     appears higher.)         appears higher.)

                     Pain score              6                       6                        6                          0–1

===== PAGE 556 =====
556   c h a p t e r 7.4    Colorectal Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 2nd–7th decades

                                 Male:Female               2:1

                                 Incidence                 Common

                                 Etiology                  Infection within anal glands located at dentate line (cryptoglandular fistula); trauma; Crohn’s dis-
                                                           ease; inflammatory processes within the peritoneal cavity; neoplasms; consequence of radiation
                                                           therapy

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Fecal Incontinence, p. 559.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Bailey HR, Snyder MJ, eds: Ambulatory Anorectal Surgery. Springer-Verlag, New York: 2000.
                                  2. Beck D, Roberts P, Saclarides T, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colorectal Surgery, 2nd edition. Springer and The American
                                     Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons, New York: 2011.
                                  3. Darrah DM, Griebling TL, Silverstein JH: Postoperative urinary retention. Anesthesiol Clin 2009; 27(3):465–84.
                                  4. Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa Healthcare,
                                     New York: 2007.
                                  5. Tan KK, Kaur G, Byrne CM, et al: Long-term outcome of the anal fistula plug for anal fistula of cryptoglandular origin.
                                     Colorectal Dis 2013; 15(12):1510–4.
        General Surgery

                                HEMORRHOIDECTOMY/STAPLED HEMORRHOIDOPEXY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Hemorrhoids are normally occurring vascular tissues located in discrete aggregations known as hem-
                                orrhoidal cushions within the distal rectum and anus. Thought to play a role in the fine control of enteric continence,
                                they are only treated if they cause a symptom that persists after conservative therapy. Hemorrhoids may bleed,
                                prolapse, and cause mucous drainage, itching, or pain (when thrombosed). The primary pathophysiologic event in
                                the development of symptomatic hemorrhoids is thought to be mucosal prolapse 2° degeneration of the fibroelastic
                                tissue that tethers vascular cushions and overlying mucosa to the submucosa. Many modern treatments diminish
                                prolapse by fixing the mucosa to the submucosa with scar tissue. Hemorrhoids are classified as internal (when above
                                the dentate line) or external (when below) (see Fig. 7.4-2). Internal hemorrhoids are further classified by symp-
                                toms: I—bleed; II— bleed, prolapse, and spontaneously reduce; III—bleed, prolapse, and require manual reduction;
                                IV—bleed, prolapse, and cannot be reduced. The most common symptom from external hemorrhoids is severe pain
                                caused by thrombosis. Surgical treatment involves excision of the thrombosed hemorrhoid, often under local anes-
                                thetic, in the office. Internal hemorrhoids may be treated by nonexcisional or excisional techniques. Nonexcisional
                                techniques generally are used in the office or outpatient clinic. They do not require an anesthetic because their use
                                is limited to the insensate tissues above the dentate line. Nonexcisional treatments include rubber-band ligation,
                                infrared coagulation, sclerotherapy, and cryotherapy.
                                Hemorrhoidectomy: Surgical hemorrhoidectomy may be performed in the lithotomy or prone jackknife position.
                                An anoscope is placed in the anal canal, and a hemorrhoid column is grasped and tented up into the lumen. A suture
                                is placed at the internal apex of the complex. An incision is started at the external apex of the hemorrhoidal complex
                                and a plane is developed deep to the hemorrhoidal tissue and superficial to the sphincter muscles. When the inter-
                                nal sphincter is identified, the dissection proceeds in the avascular space along its luminal surface. The dissection is
                                continued up into the rectum to the transfixing suture. Lateral incisions along the redundant tissue are completed
                                to excise the hemorrhoid. Care is taken to leave healthy bridges of mucosa between adjacent hemorrhoidal columns.
                                Hemostasis is obtained with cautery, and the mucosal defect may be closed with a running, absorbable suture. It also
                                is acceptable to leave the mucosal wound open. The procedure is repeated over the other enlarged, symptomatic hem-
                                orrhoidal complexes, removing redundant tissue and leaving long, vertical scars to prevent further mucosal prolapse.

===== PAGE 557 =====
Hemorrhoidectomy/Stapled Hemorrhoidopexy         557

                         VARIANT PROCEDURE OR APPROACHES
                   Whitehead procedure: The Whitehead hemorrhoidectomy (circumferential hemorrhoidectomy) and Lord
                   procedure (sphincter stretch) have been largely abandoned. Lasers have not been shown to improve results in the
                   treatment of hemorrhoids.
                   Rubber-band ligation requires no anesthesia because the band is placed on the insensate, distal rectal mucosa. An
                   anoscope is inserted into the anal canal to visualize a hemorrhoid column. The most proximal area of redundant
                   mucosa is grasped with a clamp and pulled into the barrel of the ligation gun. A rubber band is placed on the base
                   of the tented-up hemorrhoid tissue. The encompassed tissue sloughs over 4–7 d, and a scar is formed between the
                   mucosa and the underlying muscle.
                   Stapled hemorrhoidectomy: A stapled hemorrhoidectomy or hemorrhoidopexy is used for the correction of
                   mucosal hemorrhoidal prolapse. This procedure is performed in the same position and under the same anesthesia as
                   a conventional hemorrhoidectomy. A circular anal dilator is anchored to the skin with heavy sutures, an obturator is
                   passed, and a purse-string is created with absorbable 2–0 suture 3–4 cm above the dentate line. The stapler head is
                   passed above the purse-string, and the sutures are pulled while the stapler is closed. In women, the vaginal wall must
                   be examined to ensure that it has not been incorporated. The stapler is fired, cutting the incorporated mucosal pro-
                   lapse, pulling the internal and external hemorrhoids proximally. Thus the hemorrhoids themselves are not removed.
                   Hemostasis is obtained with sutures as needed. Cautery should be used with caution, because of the staples. This
                   procedure is associated with a higher rate of disease recurrence and cost.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Symptomatic hemorrhoids, bleeding, and/or prolapse

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                                            Surgical Hemorrhoidectomy                               Stapled Hemorrhoidopexy

                     Position               Prone jackknife, lithotomy, or left lateral decubitus   Prone jackknife, lithotomy

                     Incision               Series of vertical incisions from anal verge to         None
                                            top of hemorrhoid columns

                     Special                Headlight or lighted anoscope; operating                Circular anal dilator, obturator, stapler
                       instrumentation      anoscope

                     Antibiotics            None                                                    None

                     Surgical time          30–90 min                                               10–20 min

                     EBL                    < 100 mL                                                100 mL

                     Postop care            Sitz baths, oral fluids, fiber supplements

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Urinary retention: 15–30%
                                            Incontinence: 1–6%
                                            Bleeding: 2–5%
                                            Stricture: 2–5%
                                            Infection: 1–2%

                     Pain score             9                                                       5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Peak prevalence 45–65 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Prevalence 75/1000

                     Etiology               Low-fiber diet; genetic; pregnancy

                     Associated             Constipation
                       conditions

===== PAGE 558 =====
558   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Fecal Incontinence p. 559.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Corman ML, Gravie JF, Hager T, et al: Stapled haemorrhoidopexy: a consensus position paper by an international working
                                     party—indications, contra-indications and technique. Colorectal Dis 2003; 5(4):304–10.
                                  2. Gençosmanoglu R, et al: Hemorrhoidectomy: open or closed technique: a prospective, randomized clinical trial. Dis Colon
                                     Rectum 2002; 45:70–5.
                                  3. Hussein AM: Ligation-anopexy for treatment of advanced hemorrhoidal disease. Dis Colon Rectum 2001; 44:1887–90.
                                  4. Khan S, Pawlak SE, et al: Surgical treatment of hemorrhoids: prospective, randomized trial comparing closed excisional
                                     hemorrhoidectomy and the Harmonic Scalpel technique of excisional hemorrhoidectomy. Dis Colon Rectum 2001; 44:845–9.
                                  5. Shao WJ, Li GC, Zhang GH, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing stapled
                                     haemorrhoidopexy with conventional haemorrhoidectomy. Br J Surg 2008; 95(2):147–60.
                                  6. Wolff BG, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, et al, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Springer Science-
                                     Business Media, New York: 2007.

                                OPERATIONS FOR FECAL INCONTINENCE
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
        General Surgery

                                Description: In the majority of patients, fecal incontinence is caused by a combination of pudendal neuropathy
                                and atrophy of pelvic floor muscles. Only when an anatomic defect in the sphincter mechanism can be identified is
                                surgery likely to be beneficial. Sphincteroplasty is performed in the prone jackknife position after a full mechanical
                                bowel prep. An incision is made at the anal verge, centered over the area of injured sphincter, and extended sufficient-
                                ly around the anus to reach the retracted, cut edges of the sphincter. The anoderm and rectal mucosa are dissected
                                off the internal surface of the sphincter. The external surface of the sphincter mechanism is then dissected free to the
                                level of the pelvic diaphragm. Care must be taken not to injure the inferior hemorrhoidal nerves during dissection
                                around the posterior–lateral sphincter. The fibrotic portion linking the two ends of sphincter is cut, and the ends are
                                overlapped and secured in place with two layers of interrupted horizontal mattress sutures. In women with obstetric
                                injuries, the transverse perineal muscles are reapproximated. The skin may be reapproximated at the anal verge and
                                along the reconstructed perineum or left open. The remainder of the skin is closed as completely as possible.

                                VARIANT PROCEDUREs OR APPROACHES
                                Parks postanal repair: The surgical options for patients without anatomic defects in their sphincters are gener-
                                ally unsuccessful. The posterior anoplasty of Parks was designed to passively enhance continence by increasing
                                the normally occurring angle between the rectum and the anal canal and to increase the mechanical efficiency of
                                weak sphincter muscle by shortening the fiber length. Lack of efficacy has limited its use, although some surgeons
                                still perform it in the setting of continued incontinence after abdominal repair of rectal prolapse. The operation is
                                performed in the prone jackknife position after a standard bowel prep. A hemispherical incision is made at the level
                                of the intersphincteric groove over the posterior half of the anus. The plane between the internal and external anal
                                sphincters is identified and developed proximally to above the puborectalis musculus. The puborectalis fibers are
                                “reefed,” or pulled together, as far as possible with nonabsorbable sutures. The external sphincter is plicated together
                                in the midline with a series of nonabsorbable sutures that start at the deep external sphincter and progress to the
                                subcutaneous sphincter. Skin is closed with absorbable sutures.
                                Thiersch procedure: The Thiersch operation (pinch graft) has a high complication rate and should be considered
                                primarily in debilitated patients with symptomatic rectal prolapse or fecal incontinence. As originally described, the
                                anal canal was encircled with a silver wire, which served as a passive obstacle to prolapse or defecation. In more recent
                                years, an elastic sheet of Dacron-impregnated Silastic mesh has been used. Two small incisions are made on opposite
                                sides of the anal verge. A pathway around the anal canal is created by blunt dissection, and a 1.5-cm-wide piece of mesh
                                is led around the anal canal. The ends of the mesh are overlapped in one of the incisions and either sutured or stapled to-
                                gether at an appropriate level of tension. The wounds are irrigated with antibiotic solution, and the incisions are closed.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Fecal (enteric) incontinence

===== PAGE 559 =====
Operations for Fecal Incontinence         559

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                          Overlapping Sphincteroplasty          Parks Repair                Modified Thiersch Procedure

                     Position             Prone jackknife                       ⇐                           Prone jackknife or lithotomy

                     Incision             Circumanal                            ⇐                           2 small incisions lateral to the
                                                                                                            anus

                     Special              Headlight                             ⇐                           Headlight; Silastic mesh
                       instrumentation

                     Unique               Urinary catheter preop;               ⇐                           None
                       considerations     standard bowel prep

                     Antibiotics          Ertapenem 1 g iv or 2nd               ⇐                           ⇐
                                          generation cephalosporin

                     Surgical time        1–2 h                                 1h                          30–45 min

                     EBL                  < 100 mL                              ⇐                           ⇐

                     Postop care          Early: Sitz baths                     ⇐                           ⇐
                                          Late: fiber supplement,               ⇐                           ⇐
                                          stool softener

                     Mortality            Rare                                  ⇐                           ⇐

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                     Morbidity            Unimproved                            60–80%                      20%
                                          incontinence: 20%
                                          Improved, but minor                   —                           Erosion of prosthesis: 30–60%
                                          incontinence: 30%
                                          Prolonged wound                       —                           Obstructed defecation: 20–40%
                                          healing: 20%
                                          Infection: 1–2%                       —                           Infection

                     Pain score           8                                     7                           6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range            Bimodal: 3rd–5th decades for obstetric injury, fistulotomy, and perineal trauma; 6th–8th decades
                                          for pudendal neuropathy/pelvic floor atrophy

                     Male:Female          1:4

                     Incidence            Not uncommon

                     Etiology             Pudendal neuropathy; pelvic floor atrophy; obstetric injury; injury during anal surgery (fistulotomy,
                                          sphincterotomy, hemorrhoidectomy); perineal trauma; neurologic disease; congenital anomalies

                     Associated           Urinary incontinence; chronic constipation; multiparity
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: excision or repair of rectal prolapse; rectal surgery; anal fistulotomy/fistulectomy;
                   anal sphincterotomy/sphincteroplasty; hemorrhoidectomy; operations for fecal incontinence)
                   Rectal surgery is frequently performed in prone or jackknife positions. Many procedures do not require general
                   anesthesia and can be performed under MAC. Coordination with the surgeon is recommended to determine
                   type and timing of anesthesia.

===== PAGE 560 =====
560   c h a p t e r 7.4   Colorectal Surgery

                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Depending on the institutional preference, rectal procedures are frequently performed in prone or jackknife position.
                                Minor rectal surgeries do not necessarily require general endotracheal anesthesia and can be managed with sedation/
                                deep sedation alone.

                                Respiratory              A careful evaluation of patient’s respiratory status is important. If patient has ↓ reserve, the
                                                         lithotomy position may be better tolerated than the prone or jackknife positions.
                                                         Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Musculoskeletal          Rectoperineal area is very sensitive, thus pain is likely to be present, making it difficult for the
                                                         patient to stay in supine or sitting position. Consider sufficient pain control preinduction and
                                                         choose lateral decubitus position if spinal anesthesia is planned.

                                Hematologic              Acute and chronic GI blood loss not common in this patient population.
                                                         Tests: Consider CBC

                                Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication            Standard premedication (p. B-1)

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: Sedation, GA, spinal techniques may be used. Epidural anesthesia is less common and may
                                spare the anoperineal region.
        General Surgery

                                General anesthesia:

                                Induction                General (LMA vs. ETT): Standard induction (p. B-2). Procedures planned in prone or
                                                         jackknife position may require careful airway management. Consider ET intubation if air-
                                                         way concerns exist. Management of the prone patient more challenging than the supine
                                                         position.

                                Maintenance              Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                                Emergence                No special considerations

                                Regional anesthesia:

                                MAC                      IV sedation combined with local perirectal infiltration of local anesthesia by surgeon (such
                                                         as 4 quadrant pudendal nerve block) is appropriate for many outpatient procedures.
                                                         Perirectal injection of local anesthetic is painful; rapid acting agents such as propofol, remi-
                                                         fentanil, alfentanil, ketamine (hypersalivation may require anticholinergic agents) should
                                                         be administered to minimize patient discomfort during the injection. As drug effect will
                                                         vary widely among patients, careful titration of the drugs to desired level of sedation is
                                                         warranted. Consider need to return patient to supine position quickly (keep bed/gurney
                                                         at the ready).

                                Spinal                   Patient may be in either sitting, lateral decubitus, prone, or jackknife position for place-
                                                         ment of a subarachnoid block. Doses of local anesthetics should be adequate to provide a
                                                         high lumbar level (L1-2) of sensory anesthesia (e.g., bupivacaine 8–12 mg). Patients should
                                                         remain in relative head-up position with hyperbaric solutions and in head-down position
                                                         with hypobaric solutions to limit cephalad spread of block.

                                Blood and fluid           IV: 18–20 ga × 1 (depending on           Blood products rarely needed.
                                   requirements           scope of rectal procedure
                                                          NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)               Others as clinically indicated.

===== PAGE 561 =====
Operations for Fecal Incontinence          561

                    Positioning               Prone, jackknife or lithotomy may         Chest support or bolsters to optimize ventilation in
                                              be used                                    the jackknife position; care in positioning the pa-
                                              3 and pad pressure points                  tient’s extremities and genitals after turning into
                                              3 eyes and arm positioning                 jackknife position. Avoid pressure on eyes and ears
                                              3 empty stoma bags before turning         after turning patient.
                                                 prone

                    Complications             Apnea                                      May need to convert emergently from MAC to GA.
                                              Peripheral nerve injury                    Lithotomy position can damage the peroneal nerve,
                                                                                         resulting in foot drop. Improper arm position-
                                                                                         ing can lead to axillary plexus stretch and nerve
                                                                                         damage.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Urinary retention                          Catheterize until return of urinary function espe-
                                                                                         cially after spinal anesthesia, and may be prevented
                                                                                         by restricting the volume of iv fluids administered.

                    Pain                      Tailor regimen to individual and           PO analgesics may be suitable
                      management              clinical circumstances and needs.
                                              Consider preemptive analgesia: ga-
                                              bapentin 600 mg, acetaminophen,

                                                                                                                                                             General Surgery
                                              COX-2 inhibitors more extensive
                                              and painful procedure.
                                              Consider use of nonopiate ad-
                                              juncts: NSAIDS, ketamine, GABA
                                              analogues (gabapentin, pregabalin),
                                              acetaminophen PCA (p. C-3)

                    Tests                     As indicated by patient status.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bailey HR, Snyder MJ, eds: Ambulatory Anorectal Surgery. Springer-Verlag, New York: 2000.
                     2. Cosmin BC, Morris AM, Nivatvongs S, et al: Anorectal disorders. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Lillemoe KD, et al, eds.
                        Greenfield’s Surgery, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011.
                     3. Gordon, PH, Nivatvongs S, eds: Principles and Practice of Surgery of Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 3rd edition. Informa
                        Healthcare, New York: 2007.
                     4. Wolff BG, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, et al, eds: The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and Rectal Surgery. Springer Science-
                        Business Media, New York: 2007.

===== PAGE 562 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.5 Hepatic Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Samuel K. S. So, MD, FACS
                                            Harry A. Oberhelman, MD, FACS

                                            anesthesiologist
                                            Hendrikus J. M. Lemmens, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 564 =====
HEPATIC RESECTION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Samuel K. S. So
                                Description: Liver resections usually are performed to remove primary tumors or metastatic tumors to the liver.
                                The most common malignant primary liver tumor is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), usually caused by chronic
                                hepatitis B or C, and cirrhosis due to chronic alcohol abuse. Liver resection is also performed for an enlarging he-
                                patic adenoma, which is a benign primary tumor that is susceptible to rupture. The most common secondary tumors
                                removed are metastases from colorectal cancer. In rare cases, it may be necessary to resect a devitalized area of the
                                liver following trauma. The mortality and morbidity following liver resection depends on the extent of the surgery,
                                experience of the surgeon, and the patient’s hepatic function. In general, the risk of resection is higher in patients
                                with primary HCC where the uninvolved part of the liver frequently is cirrhotic or diseased from chronic hepatitis B
                                or C. Cirrhotic patients with Plt counts < 80,000, portal HTN with varices, ascites, albumin < 3.5 g/L, and prolonged
                                INR are generally unsuitable candidates for major liver resection because of the high risk of postop liver failure.
                                Intraop blood loss is the most important predictor of short-term survival. Bleeding is largely from intrahepatic
                                branches of portal and hepatic veins injured during the dissection, potentially leading to massive blood loss within
                                minutes. Liver resection performed by experienced liver surgeon using modern dissection tools often can be per-
                                formed successfully without the need for blood transfusions (cell salvage techniques should not be used when op-
                                erating on cancer patients). The mortality rate of major liver resection should be < 2–5%. In my experience, most
                                patients do not require postop ICU care and are usually discharged within 4–5 d. Improved outcomes result from
        General Surgery

                                better surgical exposure and mobilization of the liver combined with the standard adoption of new dissection tools
                                to minimize blood loss. These include new ablation devices to coagulate along the planned line of a resection (such
                                as InLine) combined with the use of dissectors using high-pressure water jet (Hydrojet) or ultrasonic pulses (CUSA)
                                to expose the intrahepatic vessels and bile ducts. Intraop ultrasound is very helpful for two reasons: (1) in planning
                                the line of resection and mapping out its relationship with the large intrahepatic portal and hepatic veins and (2) in
                                surveying the entire liver to look for multifocal lesions.
                                Anatomic vs. nonanatomic liver resection: Until the last decade, most liver surgeons performed anatomic liver
                                resections in which the porta hepatitis is dissected and the corresponding extrahepatic branches of the hepatic
                                artery, portal vein, bile duct, and hepatic vein are mobilized and ligated before resection of the liver parenchyma
                                (Fig. 7.5-1). In nonanatomic liver resections, only the tumor with a margin of 1–2 cm is removed instead of the
                                entire anatomic lobe or segment. This approach is particularly appropriate in patients with cirrhosis or chronic hepa-
                                titis, in whom removing too much of the liver will predispose them to hepatic decompensation, and in patients with
                                liver metastases where the risk of recurrence remains high. When nonanatomic resection is performed, dissection of
                                the porta hepatis is unnecessary. Instead, branches of the vessels and hepatic ducts are ligated and resected as they
                                are encountered during the resection of the liver parenchyma. All patients undergoing liver resection should also be
                                grounded with the appropriate pads prior to draping for possible radiofrequency ablation of lesions found not to be
                                suitable for resection.
                                Temporary occlusion of the hepaticoduodenal ligament that contains the main portal vein, hepatic artery, and
                                common bile duct (Pringle maneuver) can be used in resection to minimize blood loss. Most patients will tolerate
                                this maneuver for 15–20 min. In some patients, it may be necessary to repeat the maneuver twice to complete a major
                                resection. However, with good surgical exposure and standard adoption of new dissection tools to minimize blood
                                loss, the Pringle maneuver is rarely necessary.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Benign and malignant primary or metastatic tumors of the liver

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Right/Left Lobectomy/                       Partial Right           Left Lateral
                                                         Trisegmentectomy                            Lobectomy               Segmentectomy

                                 Position                Supine                                      ⇐                       ⇐

                                 Incision                Upper midline, extending to right subcos-   ⇐                       Upper midline
                                                         tal (Lexus incision)

                          564

===== PAGE 565 =====
Hepatic Resection   565

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                         Right/Left Lobectomy/                        Partial Right                Left Lateral
                                         Trisegmentectomy                             Lobectomy                    Segmentectomy

                     Special             Thompson liver retractor; InLine, Helix      ⇐                            ⇐
                       instrumentation   Hydro-jet or CUSA; TissueLink dissecting
                                         sealer; argon beam laser; tumor ablation
                                         device; intraop ultrasound; microwave or
                                         radiofrequency tumor ablation devices

                     Unique              Maintain normal core temp. Most intrahe-     ⇐                            ⇐
                       considerations    patic bleeding can be controlled
                                         temporarily by compression. Note the
                                         duration of Pringle maneuver, if applied.
                                         Give mannitol furosemide for hemoglo-
                                         binuria associated with extensive micro-
                                         wave or radiofrequency ablation of the
                                         liver to reduce the risk of postoperative
                                         acute tubular necrosis

                     Antibiotics         Vancomycin/cefazolin 1 g iv preop            ⇐                            ⇐

                     Surgical time       3–8 h                                        4–6 h                        <3h

                     Closing             Secure meticulous hemostasis; place          ⇐                            ⇐
                       considerations    two to three subphrenic or perihepatic

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                                         Jackson Pratt flat bulb suction drains.

                     EBL                 Variable (50–800 mL)                         50 mL                        50 mL

                     Postop care         PACU → ward                                  ⇐                            ⇐

                     Mortality           < 2–5%                                       ⇐                            < 1%

                     Morbidity           Ascites: 20–30%                              10–20%                       < 10%
                                         Wound infection: 5–10%                       ⇐                            ⇐
                                         Liver failure: < 5%                          ⇐                            < 2%
                                         Bile leak: < 5%                              < 2–5%                       ⇐
                                         Postop bleeding: < 2–5%                      ⇐                            ⇐

                     Pain score          7–8                                          7–8                          7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range           19–85 yr

                     Male:Female         4:1 in primary HCC
                                         2:1 in liver metastases

                     Incidence           Metastatic colorectal cancer is the most common disease treated with liver resection in the
                                         United States. The incidence of primary HCC is rising 2° the prevalence of chronic hepatitis
                                         C; however, because of delayed Dx and associated hepatitis C cirrhosis, many are not suitable
                                         resection candidates. Primary HCC is a common cancer in Asian Americans because of the high
                                         prevalence of chronic hepatitis B. Many young Asians (30–50 yr) with HCC 2° chronic hepatitis B
                                         may not have cirrhosis.

                     Associated          Cirrhosis; chronic hepatitis; and, rarely, hemochromatosis; Hx of colorectal surgery in patients
                       conditions        with liver metastases

===== PAGE 566 =====
General Surgery   566   c h a p t e r 7.5    Hepatic Surgery

                                          Figure 7.5-1. Types of traditional anatomic liver resection. (Reproduced with
                                          permission from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott,
                                          Philadelphia: 1988.)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Hepatorrhaphy, p. 567.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. D’angelica M, Fung Y: The liver. In: Townsend CM, et al, eds. Sabiston’s Textbook of Surgery, 18th edition. Sanders Elsevier,
                                     Philadelphia: 2007, 1463–523.
                                  2. Delman KA, Curley SA: Hepatic neoplasms. In: Mulholland MW, et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific Principles and
                                     Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 956–77.
                                  3. Jarnagin WR: Liver and portal venous system. In: Doherty GM, ed. Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment, 13th edition.
                                     McGraw-Hill Medical, New York: 2010, 509–43.

                                HEPATORRHAPHY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Harry A. Oberhelman
                                Description: Although most liver lacerations have stopped bleeding by the time a surgeon sees them, others require
                                suturing or partial liver resection to control bleeding. Various techniques are available to control hemorrhage,

===== PAGE 567 =====
Hepatorrhaphy   567

                   including packing, suturing, inflow occlusion, and resection. Small lacerations that have stopped bleeding require no
                   specific therapy other than possible drainage. Lacerations that continue to bleed usually can be sutured and drained.
                   Extensive tears of the liver that are actively bleeding may require temporary occlusion of the porta hepatis, contain-
                   ing the hepatic artery, portal vein, and bile duct (Pringle maneuver) to excise devitalized parenchyma and control
                   bleeding with sutures, clips, coagulators, etc. Occasionally, the hepatic vein draining the involved lobe will require
                   clamping to control back-bleeding. When the bleeding cannot be controlled, it is expedient to pack the wound, drain
                   the abdomen, and close. The pack can be removed without much risk of rebleeding within 48–72 h.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Trauma with CT evidence of hepatic laceration

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Midline abdominal

                     Special                Denier retractor
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time          1–2 h

                     EBL                    ~300–2000 mL

                     Mortality              1–2%

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                     Morbidity              Continued bleeding: 2–3%
                                            Biliary fistula
                                            Perihepatic abscess
                                            Intrahepatic hematoma
                                            Arterioportal fistula
                                            Hepatic and renal failure

                     Pain score             7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Variable

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Rare

                     Etiology               Trauma (blunt vs penetrating); surgical; hepatic adenomas; needle biopsies of liver

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR HEPATIC PROCEDURES
                   (Procedures covered: hepatic resection; hepatorrhaphy)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients presenting for hepatic surgery may have primary or metastatic tumors from GI and other sources. Liver func-
                   tion may be entirely normal in these patients. HCC is seen commonly in males > 50 yr and is associated with chronic
                   active hepatitis B or C and cirrhosis. The preop considerations listed below describe patients without cirrhosis. (See
                   Preoperative Considerations for Surgery for Portal Hypertension, p. 448 for evaluation of patients with cirrhosis).

                    Respiratory              Respiratory function is typically normal; however, patients with ascites may have respira-
                                             tory compromise.
                                             Tests: CXR; others as clinically indicated

                    Cardiovascular           Patients may be hypovolemic, and volume status should be carefully assessed before induc-
                                             tion of anesthesia (skin turgor, UO, orthostatic BP, HR, etc.). Tumors may surround major
                                             vascular structures and impede venous return. Consider evaluation with CT/MRI scan.

===== PAGE 568 =====
568   c h a p t e r 7.5   Hepatic Surgery

                                Hepatic                   Liver resection can be indicated for hemangiomas, hydatid cysts, and tumors. It is impor-
                                                          tant to determine the size of the tumor and involvement of vascular structures preop to be
                                                          adequately prepared for major intraop blood and fluid losses.
                                                          Tests: LFTs; albumin; ultrasound/CT/MRI

                                Hematologic               The liver produces all clotting factors except VIII, and the degree of hepatic insufficiency
                                                          determines the extent of any coagulopathy. T&C 2–4 U PRBCs.
                                                          Tests: CBC; PT; PTT; Plt count; others as indicated from H&P

                                Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P. NB: For elective cases, if abnormal LFTs are present on
                                                          preop labs, it is important to perform a complete medical workup. This can include re-
                                                          viewing old lab data, hepatitis serology, and an abdominal ultrasound to r/o cholestatic
                                                          causes of liver dysfunction. Surgery and anesthesia in the presence of acute hepatitis is
                                                          associated with a high mortality.

                                Premedication             Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv (see p. B-1). If PT significantly prolonged, consider 10 mg
                                                          vitamin K iv/po 24 hours before surgery. Consider FFP for rapid correction of PT.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. For major liver resections, the surgeon may attempt to reduce blood loss by apply-
                                ing intermittent vascular inflow occlusion or total vascular exclusion. As the result of ischemia induced by vascular
                                occlusion and the loss of liver mass during resection, liver function may be significantly abnormal in the postop
        General Surgery

                                 period. Coagulation abnormalities may exist; consequently, an epidural catheter for postop pain relief may be associ-
                                 ated with ↑ risk of hematoma formation. Hypovolemia (CVP < 5 mm Hg) prevents liver congestion and results in
                                 less bleeding but may increase the likelihood of postoperative renal failure. Euvolemia (CVP 7–10 mm Hg) results in
                                 more bleeding and a higher transfusion rate.

                                Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2). Restore intravascular volume before induction. Trauma
                                                          patients or those with ascites require rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) with cricoid
                                                          pressure until intubation has been confirmed. If patient is hemodynamically unstable, con-
                                                          sider etomidate (0.2–0.4 mg/kg) or ketamine (1–3 mg/kg) in place of propofol.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3); N2O can be used if bowel distention will not impede
                                                          surgical exposure/closure.
                                                          If total vascular occlusion is used, elevate CVP to at least 12 mm Hg by rapid fluid admin-
                                                          istration before cross-clamping. Have Neo-Synephrine and epinephrine infusions ready to
                                                          treat ↓ BP. After major resections, significant hemodynamic changes occur. CO and HR
                                                          increase, and systemic vascular resistance decreases.

                                Emergence                 For major hepatic resections, the patient will be best cared for in an ICU. After major blood
                                                          loss, consider keeping the patient mechanically ventilated.

                                Blood and fluid           Anticipate large blood loss            Blood loss can be significant; keep at least 2 U PRBC
                                   requirements           IV: 14–16 ga × 2                       ahead. Lobectomies often are associated with more
                                                          NS/LR @ 10–20 mL/kg/h                  blood loss than wedge resections. Massive transfu-
                                                          Fluid warmer                           sions may be required and appropriate blood prod-
                                                          Humidify gases                         ucts should be available (e.g., PRBC + FFP + Plt).
                                                          Consider utilizing rapid-transfusion   If procedure does not involve cancer, blood salvage
                                                            device                               devices may be used.

                                Control of blood          Surgical control                       Surgical occlusion of the main blood vessels en-
                                  loss                    Pringle maneuver                       tering the hilar area (Pringle maneuver), or total
                                                          Total vascular exclusion               vascular occlusion. Total vascular exclusion is ac-
                                                                                                 complished by complete occlusion of liver inflow
                                                                                                 and outflow.

===== PAGE 569 =====
Hepatorrhaphy        569

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)              Others as clinically indicated. If the extent of the
                                               UO                                          resection is not known at the beginning of surgery,
                                               Arterial line                               appropriate monitoring (CVP, arterial line, addi-
                                               ± CVP                                       tional ivs) should be established prior to beginning
                                               ± TEE                                       resection. Forced-air warmer.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes

                    Complications              Massive hemorrhage                          Ensure adequate vascular access. Consider rapid-
                                                                                           transfusion device.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              3 liver function                            Patients with normal liver function preop may have
                                               Hemorrhage                                  significant postop impairment of liver function
                                               Electrolyte imbalance                       2° loss of liver mass or ischemic injury induced by
                                               Hypoglycemia                                vascular occlusion.
                                               Hypothermia, shivering
                                               DIC
                                               Pulmonary insufficiency                     > 90% of patients will develop some form of respiratory
                                                                                           complication (atelectasis, effusion, pneumonia).

                    Pain                       PCA (see p. C-3)                            Patient should be recovered in ICU or hospital ward

                                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                      management                                                           that is accustomed to treating the side effects of
                                                                                           opiates (e.g., respiratory depression, breakthrough
                                                                                           pain, nausea, pruritus).

                    Tests                      ABG; CXR; others as clinically
                                               indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Clavien PA, Petrowsky H, DeOliveira ML, Graf R: Strategies for safer liver surgery and partial liver transplantation. N Engl J
                        Med 2007; 356(15):1545–59.
                     2. Niemann CU, Roberts JP, Ascher NL, et al: Intraoperative hemodynamics and liver function in adult to adult living liver
                        donors. Liver Transpl 2002; 8:1126–32.
                     3. Redai I, Emond J, Brentjens T: Anesthetic considerations during liver surgery. Surg Clin North Am 2004; 84(2):401–11.
                     4. Steadman RH, Braunfeld MY: The liver: surgery and anesthesia. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical
                        Anesthesia, 6th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2013, 1294–325.
                     5. Suman A, Carey W: Assessing the risk of surgery in patients with liver disease. Cleve Clin J Med 2006; 73(4):398–404.

===== PAGE 570 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.6 Biliary Tract
                                             Surgery

                                             surgeon
                                             C. Andrew Bonham, MD

                                             anesthesiologist
                                             Hendrikus J. M. Lemmens, MD, PhD

===== PAGE 572 =====
OPEN CHOLECYSTECTOMY AND COMMON BILE
                                DUCT EXPLORATION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: With the advent of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the traditional open cholecystectomy has become
                                a rarity and is generally reserved for gallbladders that are expected to be difficult to remove due to inflammation,
                                previous operations and adhesions, or because of other medical problems, such as coagulopathy or cirrhosis. In most
                                institutions, fewer than 10% of cholecystectomies will be begun as open procedures, and perhaps 5% of laparoscopic
                                cholecystectomies will be converted to open cholecystectomies during the course of the operation due to technical
                                difficulties, complications, or unexpected findings. Because of its rarity, the open cholecystectomy may be a more
                                challenging operation for both surgeon and anesthesiologist than it was in previous decades. A small number of open
                                cholecystectomies are performed in an urgent fashion following a complication of an attempted laparoscopic cho-
                                lecystectomy and may be associated with significant instability from hemorrhage or sepsis related to an iatrogenic
                                injury of abdominal or retroperitoneal structures.
                                The technical aspects of open cholecystectomy have not changed since its original description over 100 years ago.
                                The operation can be performed through a right subcostal (Kocher), paramedian, or midline incision. Upward trac-
                                tion is applied to the liver or gallbladder, whereas downward traction on the duodenum exposes the region of the
                                cystic duct and artery and common duct. Adequate exposure is critical to performing a safe operation. Depending
                                on local conditions and the surgeon’s preference, the gallbladder may be removed from the top down, excising the
                                gallbladder from the liver bed and isolating the cystic duct and artery as the final stage of the operation. The cystic
                                duct and artery may be isolated and divided first, and the gallbladder removed retrograde from the gallbladder bed
        General Surgery

                                as the final step of the procedure. The anatomy of the biliary tree is quite variable, with the classic anatomy present in
                                only 30% of patients, and few surgeons always remove the gallbladder in exactly the same way every time. (Fig. 7.6-1
                                shows exposure of the gallbladder.)

                                          Figure 7.6-1. Incision and exposure of the gallbladder. (Reproduced with permission
                                          from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott
                                          Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2002.)

                          572

===== PAGE 573 =====
Open Cholecystectomy and Common Bile Duct Exploration             573

                   Cholangiography may be performed at the discretion of the surgeon. Some surgeons perform it in all patients, and
                   others perform it only in patients in whom there is some clinical evidence of choledocholithiasis. The cystic duct is
                   opened and a catheter placed into the duct and secured with a ligature, tie, or special cholangiogram clamp. Dye is
                   injected into the biliary tree via the catheter, and x-rays are taken. If stones are found, a common duct exploration
                   may be performed. Alternatively, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERCP) with stone extraction may be
                   carried out postoperatively. Cholangiography usually adds 10–15 min to the procedure.
                   Choledochotomy, or “common duct exploration,” is the opening and exploration of the common duct for the pur-
                   pose of extracting stones. Once commonly performed, it is a procedure reserved chiefly for patients who have failed
                   management of common duct stones with endoscopic (ERCP) or laparoscopic techniques. Common duct stones are
                   visualized by operative cholangiography to determine number of stones, position, and the anatomy of the duct. Ducts
                   smaller than 5 mm in diameter are at greater risk of injury with common duct exploration and should be managed
                   endoscopically. An extensive Kocher maneuver is performed to allow exposure and palpation of the entire duct, in-
                   cluding the intrapancreatic portion. A longitudinal incision is made in the duct, and exploration is carried out through
                   this incision. The duct may be irrigated with NS, balloon catheters may be passed, and various instruments introduced
                   to grasp, remove, or crush retained stones. The duct may be biopsied by this approach, and choledochoscopy—the
                   direct visualization of the duct’s interior using a small flexible scope—can be performed. Rarely, an impacted stone may
                   require electrohydraulic or laser lithotripsy through the choledochoscope, adding considerable time to the operation
                   in centers equipped to perform the procedure. The choledochotomy is closed over a T-tube to allow decompression of
                   the edematous duct and later extraction of stones missed at the initial exploration. In the past, transduodenal sphinc-
                   teroplasty was utilized for stones impacted near the sphincter of Oddi, but this procedure has largely been replaced by
                   endoscopic or percutaneous techniques at specialized centers. It is reserved for highly unusual cases, such as a patient
                   with a previous Billroth II gastrectomy. Depending on the complexity of the findings, a common duct exploration
                   can be expected to add from 30 min to over 1 h to the cholecystectomy. In general, the mortality of patients undergo-

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                   ing common duct exploration is ~2–5 times that of a simple cholecystectomy. This difference can be explained by the
                   fact that patients undergoing common duct exploration tend to be older and sicker or suffering from concomitant
                   cholangitis—the opening of the duct itself is not necessarily a significant physiologic insult.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Cholecystectomy remains the mainstay of treatment for symptomatic biliary stone
                   disease. Nonsurgical treatment of cholelithiasis, particularly by oral dissolution and/or lithotripsy, has very limited
                   usefulness and is rarely used in clinical practice. Tube cholecystostomy can be performed as an open procedure or
                   percutaneously. It is generally reserved as a temporary measure in patients too ill to tolerate a more extensive procedure.

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Symptomatic cholelithiasis; acute cholecystitis; chronic cholecystitis; biliary dyskinesia;
                   gallbladder polyps or carcinoma; choledocholithiasis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                   Cholecystectomy/Common Duct
                                             Cholecystectomy                                       Exploration

                     Position                Supine                                                ⇐

                     Incision                Right subcostal or midline                            Right subcostal and/or midline

                     Special                 Costal margin retractor; cholangiocatheter            Choledochotomy instruments;
                       instrumentation                                                             choledochoscope

                     Unique                  Requires intraop x-ray for cholangiogram.             May include choledochoscopy
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Ampicillin, piperacillin, or mezlocillin, 1–3 g iv;   ⇐
                                             gentamicin; or cefotetan 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           45–90 min                                             1–2.5 h

                     Closing                 Muscle relaxation                                     ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                     Minimal to 250 mL                                     ⇐

                     Postop care             PACU → ward                                           ⇐

===== PAGE 574 =====
574   c h a p t e r 7.6   Biliary Tract Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                              Cholecystectomy/Common Duct
                                                          Cholecystectomy                                     Exploration

                                 Mortality                0.1% under 50 yr; 0.5% over 50 yr                   0–1.5% under 60 yr; 5% in advanced age

                                 Morbidity                Postop bile leak: 0–9%                              ⇐
                                                          Pancreatitis: 0–4.6%                                2–5%
                                                          Bile duct injury: 0–0.25%
                                                          Cardiac and respiratory complications: Rare,
                                                          but leading cause of death
                                                          Hemorrhage: Rare

                                 Pain score               6                                                   6–7

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                Mostly adult; increases with age

                                 Male:Female              1:2–3

                                 Incidence                600,000/yr in the United States; ≥ 90% performed laparoscopically

                                 Etiology                 See Associated Conditions (below).

                                 Associated               Ileal disease; cirrhosis; hemolytic disorders; choledocholithiasis; cholangitis or active
        General Surgery

                                   conditions             pancreatitis

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Biliary Tract Surgery, p. 580.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Blumgart LH: Stones in the common bile duct–clinical features and open surgical approaches and techniques. In: Blumgart
                                     LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas, 4th edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 528–47.
                                  2. Fried GM, Feldman LS, Klassen DR: Cholecystectomy and common bile duct exploration. In: Souba WW, Fink MP, Jurkovich
                                     GJ, et al, eds. ACS Surgery: Principles and Practice 2006. WebMD, New York: 2006, 651–72.
                                  3. Gertsch P: The technique of cholecystectomy. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas, 4th
                                     edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 496–505.
                                  4. Matthews BD, Strasberg SM: Management of common duct stones. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 9th edition.
                                     Mosby Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2008, 412–17.
                                  5. Nagle AP, Soper NJ, Hines JR: Cholecystectomy (open and laparoscopic). In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingotis Abdominal
                                     Operations, 11th edition. McGraw Hill Medical, New York: 2007, 847–63.
                                  6. Zemon H, Ponsky TA: Acute cholecystitis. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 9th edition. Mosby Elsevier,
                                     Philadelphia: 2008, 408–12.

                                BILIARY DRAINAGE PROCEDURES
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Biliary drainage procedures may be performed for malignant and nonmalignant indications, and the
                                type of drainage procedure performed depends on factors such as the nature of the biliary obstruction, the patient’s
                                overall condition and prognosis, the need for other surgical procedures, and institutional expertise. Most drainage
                                procedures of the biliary tree are performed with endoscopic and/or transhepatic techniques. These techniques
                                allow concomitant treatment of biliary stone disease, decompression of obstructive jaundice, relief of cholangitis
                                and delineation of the anatomy of the biliary tree. There remain a significant number of patients, however, for whom
                                a traditional surgical procedure is the most appropriate. With the advent of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, surgical
                                bile duct injuries have become the most common reason for surgical biliary drainage procedures. In general, the

===== PAGE 575 =====
Biliary Drainage Procedures        575

                   complexity of the different operations that may be performed and the morbidity attendant to these has more to do
                   with the indications for operation than with the procedure that is performed.
                   All of these operations are performed under GA through an upper midline or right subcostal incision. Self-retaining
                   retractors are used to retract the liver superiorly to expose the region of the porta hepatis. If the gallbladder will
                   not be used for the bypass procedure (cholecystojejunostomy), then it usually is removed as the first step in the
                   procedure (see Open Cholecystectomy, p. 572). If the patient has had previous upper right quadrant surgery, the
                   complexity and duration of the procedure and blood loss may increase significantly. Any associated hepatic cirrhosis
                   may make the procedure particularly demanding. Most patients undergoing surgical biliary drainage procedures
                   have had several nonsurgical instrumentations of the bile duct prior to presenting for surgery. Indwelling stents re-
                   sult in colonization of the biliary tract with any number of bacterial or fungal organisms from which the patient may
                   have already suffered bouts of cholangitis. It is not unusual for the patient to develop bacteremia during the operation
                   while these stents are being manipulated.
                   Transduodenal sphincteroplasty for benign obstruction of the ampulla of Vater or for extensive choledocholithia-
                   sis has largely been abandoned in favor of the more well-tolerated and less-invasive endoscopic sphincterotomy.
                   It remains the treatment of choice for rare cases of early ampullary carcinoma. Endoscopic sphincterotomy and/or
                   placement of an internal stent is the most commonly performed technique for opening the ampulla and usually is
                   performed by gastroenterologists outside the OR with iv sedation. Open sphincteroplasty is usually reserved for
                   patients in whom endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) has been unsuccessful or in whom a lapa-
                   rotomy is required for other reasons. For these open procedures, the second portion of duodenum is incised over the
                   region of the ampulla, and the ampulla is cannulated. A longitudinal incision is made over the course of the ampulla,
                   and the mucosa of the ampulla is sutured to the mucosa of the duodenum with fine interrupted sutures with care
                   being taken not to compromise the pancreatic duct. The duodenum is closed with suture, a small closed suction drain

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   is placed, and the wound is closed. A postop stay of 5–7 d can be expected.
                   Cholecystojejunostomy usually is performed as palliation for malignant obstruction of the distal bile duct. Its ad-
                   vantage is that it does not require dissection of the portal triad, but the long-term results are poor as biliary obstruc-
                   tion typically recurs as the malignancy advances. The abdomen is opened as described above, and the region of the
                   porta hepatis examined to ensure that the cystic duct is not imminently compromised by tumor. The jejunum is then
                   brought up to the gallbladder, usually bypassing the jejunum through the transverse mesocolon. The anastomosis
                   may be performed either to an intact loop of jejunum (loop cholecystojejunostomy) or to a Roux-en-Y loop of
                   jejunum (Roux-en-Y cholecystojejunostomy) and is carried out with one or two layers of sutures, depending on
                   surgeon’s preference. If a Roux-en-Y is created, a second jejunojejunal anastomosis must be performed. This proce-
                   dure has largely been replaced by transhepatic and endoscopic techniques.
                   Choledochoduodenostomy is an archaic procedure in which the bile duct is incised longitudinally and anasto-
                   mosed directly to the adjacent duodenum. This was performed historically in patients with gallstones impacted
                   at the ampulla. However, loss of the normal sphincter mechanism at the ampulla allows reflux of duodenal con-
                   tents directly into the bile duct. Patients may suffer from repeated episodes of cholangitis or obstructive jaundice
                   from debris occluding the anastomosis. Secondary biliary cirrhosis may occur, and the author has seen one case
                   proceed to liver transplantation in which a cast of the biliary tree comprised of fibrous food material was extract-
                   ed from the choledochoduodenal anastomosis. Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy or hepaticojejunostomy
                   remains the gold standard by which all other biliary drainage procedures are measured. An anastomosis is fashioned
                   between the common bile duct, common hepatic duct, or even the lobar or segmental bile ducts and a Roux-en-Y
                   loop of jejunum. This is often a relatively demanding operation because it requires dissection deep in the porta
                   hepatis to gain access to the bile duct. Furthermore, many patients have had previous surgery in the porta hepatis
                   with extensive formation of adhesions. Long-term results are more reliable, however, and thus surgical drainage is
                   preferred to less-invasive procedures for benign disease. Exposure of the biliary tree is the same as for the above pro-
                   cedures. The gallbladder is always removed (if it is still present). The bile duct is dissected free from the surrounding
                   structures in the porta hepatis and traced proximally into the liver to healthy tissue above the level of obstruction.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Endoscopic or transhepatic placement of temporary or permanent biliary
                   stents is an increasingly common alternative to surgical drainage in patients with incurable pancreatic or biliary tract
                   disease.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Transduodenal sphincteroplasty: extensive choledocholithiasis, often after failed attempt
                   at ERCP; rarely, malignant disease. Cholecystojejunostomy: malignant obstruction of the distal common bile duct,
                   usually due to pancreatic cancer. Choledochojejunostomy or hepaticojejunostomy: benign strictures of the distal bile
                   duct; long-standing stone disease; pancreatitis; iatrogenic injury; Oriental cholangiohepatitis; after resection of some
                   tumors of the pancreas or bile duct.

===== PAGE 576 =====
576   c h a p t e r 7.6   Biliary Tract Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                           Cholecysto-                    Choledocho-                Choledocho-              Transduodenal
                                                           jejunostomy                    jejunostomy                duodenostomy             sphincteroplasty

                                 Position                  Supine                         ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐

                                 Incision                  Midline or right sub-costal    ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐

                                 Special instrumentation Costal retractor                 ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐

                                 Unique considerations     Consider usual prep for        ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐
                                                           patients with obstructive
                                                           jaundice

                                 Antibiotics               Ampicillin, piperacillin or    ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐
                                                           mezlocillin, 1–3 g iv ±
                                                           gentamicin; or cefotetan
                                                           1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time             1 h; may be significantly      1.5–3 h                    ⇐                        ⇐
                                                           longer if resection of
                                                           tumor is considered

                                 Closing considerations    Muscle relaxation; NG          ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐
                                                           suction

                                 EBL                       < 250 mL (greater if            250–500 mL (greater       ⇐                        < 250 mL
        General Surgery

                                                           tumor resection per-            if tumor resection                                 (transfusion
                                                           formed, or in presence         performed, or in pres-                             rarely needed)
                                                           of portal HTN)                  ence of portal HTN)

                                 Postop care               PACU                           ⇐                          ⇐                        ⇐

                                 Mortality                 ≤ 35% in advanced               ≤ 29%, with pancre-       0–5.4% (usually for      0–7%
                                                           pancreatic cancer; other-       atic cancer; 0.5% for     benign disease)
                                                           wise, < 10%                    benign disease

                                 Morbidity                 Sepsis                         ⇐                          ⇐                        Pancreatitis: Rare
                                                           Respiratory complications      ⇐                          ⇐                        Recurrent
                                                           Renal failure                  ⇐                          ⇐                        cholangitis: Rare
                                                           Hemorrhage                     ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           Wound infection                ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           Breakdown of biliary           ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           anastomosis                    ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           Thrombotic complications       ⇐                          ⇐

                                 Pain score                7                              7                          7                        6

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                     5th–7th decade; may be younger for repair of laparoscopic cholecystectomy injuries

                                 Male:Female                   1.1:2.1

                                 Incidence                     Procedure-related incidence not available, but clearly declining in favor of techniques by inter-
                                                               ventional gastroenterology and radiology.

                                 Etiology                      See Usual Preop Diagnosis, above.

                                 Associated conditions         Jaundice (very common); fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies; malignancy, especially pancreatic
                                                               (common); malnutrition (common)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Biliary Tract Surgery, p. 580.

===== PAGE 577 =====
Excision of Bile Duct Tumor          577

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Baker MS, Lillemoe KD: Benign biliary strictures. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 9th edition. Mosby Elsevier,
                        Philadelphia: 2008, 420–5.
                     2. Blumgart LH, DíAngelica M, Jarnagin WR: Biliary-enteric anastomosis. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver, Biliary
                        Tract, and Pancreas, 4th edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 455–74.
                     3. Jarnagin WR, Blumgart LH: Biliary stricture and fistula. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas,
                        4th edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 628–81.
                     4. Melton GB, Lillemoe KD: Choledochal cyst and biliary strictures. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingotís Abdominal
                        Operations, 11th edition. McGraw Hill Medical, New York: 2007, 889–920.

                   EXCISION OF BILE DUCT TUMOR
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Primary tumors (cholangiocarcinomas) of the extrahepatic bile ducts, including the hepatic bifurca-
                   tion (Klatskin tumors) are uncommon malignancies, with the only curative treatment for them being surgical exci-
                   sion. Such tumors are usually classified as being proximal bile duct tumors, involving the hepatic bifurcation and
                   above; middle bile duct tumors, involving the midportion of the common hepatic and common bile duct; and distal
                   bile duct tumors, which involve the distal bile duct, including the intrapancreatic or intraduodenal portion of the bile
                   duct (Fig. 7.6-1). The gallbladder usually will be removed in any such operation.
                   Distal bile duct tumors, which carry a significantly higher cure rate than either proximal bile duct or pancreatic

                                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                   tumors, may be treated by pancreaticoduodenectomy. (See p. 632 for discussion of this operation.)
                   Mid-bile duct tumors usually are excised by removing a generous portion of the mid bile duct, resecting the ducts up to
                   the hepatic bifurcation, and sometimes performing a pancreaticoduodenectomy. Biliary drainage usually is established
                   by anastomosing the proximal bile duct to a Roux loop of jejunum. For proximal bile duct tumors, most of the extrahe-
                   patic bile ducts are excised and biliary drainage is established by anastomosis of the right and left hepatic ducts or even
                   multiple segmental ducts to a Roux loop of jejunum. These are often technically demanding operations with the potential
                   for major blood loss. It may be necessary to perform a major hepatic resection at the same time, and the possibility of
                   this should always be assumed when an operation of this sort is carried out. Often, a transhepatic catheter will have been
                   placed radiographically preoperatively to provide relief of jaundice and to facilitate identification of the bile ducts. Colo-
                   nization of the biliary tract with enteric bacteria or yeast is common and may result in bacteremia during surgical ma-
                   nipulation. Prolonged cholestasis may lead to fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, in particular vitamin K deficiency, which
                   may cause coagulopathy. Long-standing biliary obstruction may cause moderate atrophy and portal venous compromise.
                   Surgical exposure for any of these operations usually is achieved through a long midline or transverse subcostal incision
                   with midline extension and the use of self-retaining retractors. The liver and gallbladder are retracted superiorly while
                   downward traction is placed on the duodenum. If the gallbladder is still in place, a cholecystectomy is performed (see
                   p. 572). For proximal bile duct tumors and mid-bile duct tumors not requiring pancreaticoduodenectomy, the bile duct
                   is divided distally, just above the duodenum, and the pancreatic portion of the bile duct is oversewn. The bile duct is then
                   resected proximally to the level of the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts. A Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum is anastomosed
                   to the hepatic ducts to establish biliary drainage. Drains are placed, and most surgeons place a NG tube for such cases.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Endoscopic or transhepatic stenting of areas of stricture often is used as a
                   palliative alternative to surgical excision. These are usually performed radiographically and do not require GA. They
                   may be used as an alternative to resection or in preparation for surgery.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cholangiocarcinoma (common); benign strictures of the bile ducts (infrequent); scleros-
                   ing cholangitis (rare)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                      Supine

                     Incision                      Midline or subcostal

                     Special instrumentation       Costal retractor

                     Unique considerations         Many cases prove unresectable at operation. Intraoperative radiation therapy may be used.

===== PAGE 578 =====
578   c h a p t e r 7.6    Biliary Tract Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Antibiotics                   Ampicillin, piperacillin, or mezlocillin, 1–3 g iv, ± gentamicin; or cefotetan 1–2 g iv; Diflucan 200 mg
                                                               iv; antibiotics may be adjusted based on preoperative bile cultures

                                 Surgical time                 3–8 h

                                 Closing considerations        Muscle relaxation required for closure; NG suction.

                                 EBL                           500–5000 mL, depending on need for liver resection and presence of portal HTN.

                                 Postop care                   ICU postoperatively

                                 Mortality                     5–10%

                                 Morbidity                     Sepsis; hemorrhage; anastomotic leakage; wound infection; liver failure; VTE

                                 Pain score                    7–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                     50–70

                                 Male:Female                   Male > female

                                 Incidence                     4500 cases of bile duct cancer/yr in the United States.

                                 Etiology
        General Surgery

                                                               Multifactorial

                                 Associated conditions         Ulcerative colitis; sclerosing cholangitis; typhoid carrier state; Clonorchis sinensis; chole-
                                                               dochal cyst; Caroli’s disease; gallstones

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Biliary Tract Surgery, p. 580.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. DeOliveira ML, Kambakamba P, Clavien PA: Advances in liver surgery for cholangiocarcinoma. Curr Opin Gastroenterol
                                     2013; 29(3):293–8.
                                  2. Jarnagin WR, DíAngelica M, Blumgart LH: Intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary cancer. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the
                                     Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas, 4th edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 782–826.
                                  3. Taylor BR, Langer B: Procedures for benign and malignant biliary tract disease. In: Souba WW, Fink MP, Jurkovich GJ, et al,
                                     eds. ACS Surgery: Principles and Practice 2006. WebMD, New York: 2006, 673–87.
                                  4. Whang EE, Zinner MJ: Cancer of the gallbladder and bile ducts. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingotís Abdominal
                                     Operations, 11th edition. McGraw Hill-Medical, New York: 2007, 921–35.

                                CHOLEDOCHAL CYST EXCISION OR ANASTOMOSIS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: This rare congenital anomaly includes various types of dilatation of the biliary tree, and patients may
                                present with cystolithiasis, cholangitis, pancreatitis or, rarely, malignancy. Adults with long-standing obstructive jaun-
                                dice from a choledochal cyst may present with secondary biliary cirrhosis. Although four types of cysts are commonly
                                recognized, the vast majority consist of fusiform dilatation of much or most of the extrahepatic biliary tree. Although
                                the traditional description of choledochal cyst is that of an infant with a palpable abdominal mass and jaundice or
                                cholangitis, this is a relatively rare presentation today. Today, many cysts are found in adults undergoing evaluation
                                for symptoms thought to be due to gallbladder disease. These patients may present with biliary colic, pancreatitis, or
                                cholangitis. Recommended treatment consists of excision of the cyst when technically safe. C         yst-enteric bypass,
                                usually to a Roux loop of jejunum, is almost never performed today because of the small but real risk of developing
                                malignancy in these cysts. Only in an elderly patient under unusual technical circumstances would this be appropriate.

===== PAGE 579 =====
Choledochal Cyst Excision or Anastomosis             579

                   The operation is performed through a midline or right subcostal incision. The liver is retracted superiorly and the duode-
                   num inferiorly, exposing the biliary tree. The gallbladder is excised, along with as much of the cyst as possible. Intraopera-
                   tive cholangiogram demonstrates the transition from cyst to normal biliary tract. The duct is divided as distally as possible,
                   just above the duodenum, and the cyst reflected superiorly. The entire cyst should be excised to prevent the development
                   of malignancy in the remnant. This not infrequently requires excision to the hepatic bifurcation, and an anastomosis is
                   performed at this level, often between the common orifice of the right and left hepatic ducts and a Roux loop of jejunum.
                   Diffuse involvement of the intrahepatic bile ducts (Caroliís disease) may require liver resection or transplantation.
                   Reoperative cases are increasingly common; most follow a cyst-enteric bypass. These cases may be significantly more
                   difficult than first-time operations.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: There is an increasing tendency among gastroenterologists to perform
                   endoscopic sphincterotomy in these patients, rather than to refer them for surgical resection, particularly in older
                   patients. It remains to be seen if these patients will develop cancer in the retained cysts.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Choledochal cyst, the most common type involving fusiform enlargement of the entire
                   extrahepatic biliary tree

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                     Supine

                     Incision                     Midline or right subcostal

                     Special instrumentation      Costal retractor

                     Antibiotics                  Ampicillin, piperacillin, or mezlocillin, 1–3 g iv, ± gentamicin; or cefotetan 1–2 g iv

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                     Surgical time                2–4 h

                     Closing considerations       NG suction

                     EBL                          250 mL, with potentially greater blood loss in reoperations

                     Postop care                  PACU → ward

                     Mortality                    Very rare

                     Morbidity                    Anastomotic leak
                                                  Wound infection
                                                  Pulmonary complications
                                                  Pancreatitis

                     Pain score                   5–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                    Classically, 60% < 10 yr of age, although this may be changing; also adults of all ages

                     Male:Female                  1:3

                     Incidence                    Rare in the United States; more common in Japan

                     Etiology                     Unclear

                     Associated conditions        Jaundice; pancreatitis; malignancy within the cyst

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Locke JE, Lipsett PA: Cystic disorders of the bile ducts. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 9th edition. Mosby
                        Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2008, 430–7.
                     2. Melton GB, Lillemoe KD: Choledochal cyst and biliary strictures. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingotís Abdominal
                        Operations, 11th edition. McGraw-Hill Medical, New York: 2007, 889–920.
                     3. Nagorney DM: Bile duct cysts in adults. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas, 4th edition.
                        Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 991–1004.
                     4. Nagorney DM, Sarmiento JM: Surgical management of cystic disease of the liver. In: Blumgart LH, ed. Surgery of the Liver,
                        Biliary Tract, and Pancreas, 4th edition. Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia: 2007, 1021–33.

===== PAGE 580 =====
580   c h a p t e r 7.6   Biliary Tract Surgery

                                ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR BILIARY
                                TRACT SURGERY
                                (Procedures covered: open cholecystectomy; cholangiography; choledochotomy; biliary drainage procedures;
                                transduodenal sphincterotomy or sphincteroplasty; cholecystojejunostomy; excision of bile duct tumor;
                                choledochal cyst excision/anastomosis)

                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients presenting for biliary tract surgery are an extremely diverse group, ranging from the otherwise healthy
                                to the extremely ill. With the increasing popularity of laparoscopic surgery, open cholecystectomies will be per-
                                formed rarely, or when it is not possible to complete the laparoscopic procedure. Cirrhosis, even of a mild de-
                                gree, substantially increases the risk of cholecystectomy, with hemorrhage and postoperative liver failure being
                                the greatest danger. Patients with bile duct tumors are usually jaundiced at presentation and have undergone
                                transhepatic and/or endoscopic studies for diagnostic purposes. Often an external transhepatic biliary drain or
                                common bile duct stent placed endoscopically may be present, and jaundice may have been relieved. Rarely, a
                                hepatic resection may be performed as part of the procedure. Prior operation or the presence of portal HTN
                                may substantially increase the duration, complexity, and blood loss of the procedure.

                                Respiratory               Pain 2° an acute abdominal process may impair respiratory function (↓ FRC, hypoventila-
                                                          tion, atelectasis). For patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy, intraabdominal
                                                          CO2 insufflation may → atelectasis, ↓ FRC, ↑ PIP, and ↑ PaCO2. Tachypnea, hyperpnea,
        General Surgery

                                                          and acute respiratory alkalosis can be signs of sepsis, or due solely to pain associated with
                                                          inflammation of the gallbladder.
                                                          Tests: Consider CXR and others as indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular            Patients may be dehydrated from fever, vomiting, and decreased oral intake; assess hemo-
                                                          dynamic status by evaluating BP and HR in the supine and standing positions. Fluid resus-
                                                          citate if patient shows Sx of orthostatic ↓ SBP until hemodynamic status improves. Patients
                                                          undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy may experience hemodynamic compromise
                                                          2° positioning (reverse Trendelenburg → excessive intraabdominal pressure with subse-
                                                          quent impairment of venous return). Epigastric discomfort is common with biliary tract
                                                          disease and can mimic symptoms of myocardial ischemia.
                                                          Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                                Renal                     In patients with obstructive jaundice, preop administration of bile salts po may prevent
                                                          renal insufficiency following surgery.
                                                          Tests: UA and others as indicated from H&P

                                Gastrointestinal          Patients with peritonitis will exhibit guarding and may develop abdominal distention and
                                                          paralytic ileus. Therefore, full-stomach precautions are warranted. Laparoscopic approach
                                                          is contraindicated in these patients. Ensure adequate hydration and consider administra-
                                                          tion of lactulose or bile salts.
                                                          Tests: Bilirubin; AST (SGOT); ALT (SGPT); alkaline phosphatase; albumin

                                Hematologic               Leukocytosis is often present with a moderate left shift. ✓ coags. Administer vitamin K as
                                                          needed (10 mg iv/sc).
                                                          Tests: CBC, with differential and Plt

                                Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication             Meperidine (0.5–0.6 mg/kg iv) is thought to cause less sphincter of Oddi spasm than other
                                                          opiates. Sphincter spasm can interfere with intraop cholangiograms and cause pain; re-
                                                          verse opiate-induced spasm with naloxone in 40 mcg increments. Atropine (0.4–0.6 mg
                                                          im or iv) or glycopyrrolate (0.2–0.3 mg im or iv) may help decrease spasm of the sphincter
                                                          and can be given in combination with the opiate. Parenteral vitamin K is indicated if PT is
                                                          prolonged (10 mg/d po or im for 3 d). Administer H2-antagonists (ranitidine 50 mg iv); if
                                                          patient is at risk for gastric aspiration.

===== PAGE 581 =====
Anesthetic Considerations for Biliary Tract Surgery            581

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. In patients at risk for aspiration, ET intubation should be accomplished following a
                   rapid-sequence iv induction (see p. B-4).

                    Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2) if no aspiration risk. In patients at risk of aspiration, a
                                              rapid-sequence induction should be performed (see p. B-4).

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxants facilitate surgery and are indicated.

                    Emergence                 If there is a risk for aspiration of gastric contents, patient should be extubated awake after
                                              return of protective airway reflexes; otherwise, no special considerations.

                    Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss                       Blood products usually not required. Anticipate that
                       requirements                                                    patient maybe dehydrated and require generous iv hy-
                                                                                       dration (e.g., 10–15 mL/kg) before anesthetic induction.
                                              Possible 3rd-space loss
                                              IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2                       IV size and number according to risk of significant
                                              NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h                      blood loss.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          Others as clinically indicated.

                    Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points                A steep, reverse Trendelenburg position may be re-
                                              ✓ eyes                                   quired, causing cardiorespiratory impairment: ve-
                                                                                       nous return → ↓ CO

                                                                                                                                                             General Surgery
                    Complications             Atelectasis 2° surgical retraction       These complications are unique to laparoscopic
                                              ↓ BP                                     procedures.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Ventilatory impairment                     Monitor patients for hypoxemia in the postop period.
                                              Pneumothorax                               Administer supplemental O2, and consider a portable
                                              Atelectasis                                CXR to aid in the diagnosis.
                                              PONV                                       See p. B-1
                                              VTE                                        See p. B-2
                                              Subcutaneous emphysema

                    Pain                      PCA (See p. C-3)                           Intercostal nerve blocks, intrapleural analgesia,
                      management                                                         or epidural analgesia are also useful techniques.
                                                                                         Prolonged PCA meperidine is associated with ↑
                                                                                         normeperidine → CNS disorder, seizures.
                                              Shoulder pain                              2° subdiaphragmatic gas trapping

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Duncan CB, Riall TS: Evidence-based current surgical practice: calculous gallbladder disease. J Gastrointest Surg 2012;
                        16(11):2011–25.
                     2. Mitra S, Khandelwal P, Roberts K, Kumar S, Vadivelu N: Pain relief in laparoscopic cholecystectomy—a review of the current
                        options. Pain Pract 2012; 12(6):485–96.
                     3. Rondelli F, Manina G, Agnelli G, Becattini C: Venous thromboembolism after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: clinical burden
                        and prevention. Surg Endosc 2013; 27(6):1860–4.

===== PAGE 582 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.7 Laparoscopic
                                            General Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Myriam J. Curet, MD
                                            Sherry M. Wren, MD
                                            Maureen M. Tedesco, MD

                                            anesthesiologists
                                            Ruth M. Fanning, MB, BCh, MRCPI, FFARCSI
                                            Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD (Laparoscopic general surgery)
                                            Jay B. Brodsky, MD, (Laparoscopic bariatric surgery)
                                            Jerry Ingrande, MD, MS (Laparoscopic bariatric surgery)
                                            Brendan Carvalho, MBBCh, FRCA (Laparoscopy
                                               in pregnancy)

===== PAGE 584 =====
LAPAROSCOPIC REPAIR OF PERFORATED PEPTIC ULCER
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Duodenal ulcer perforation occurs in 5–10% of duodenal ulcer patients and is responsible for more
                                than 70% of deaths associated with PUD. These patients can present in shock and often are extremely volume deplet-
                                ed. Open repair is indicated if the patient has a “hostile” abdomen, if there is simultaneous bleeding and perforation,
                                if the patient is hemodynamically unstable, if the patient has significant cardiovascular or respiratory risk factors that
                                would make them not tolerate a pneumoperitoneum, or if the surgeon has inadequate experience with the laparo-
                                scopic approach. In addition, trained OR personnel and equipment must be available. Risk factors associated with
                                unsuccessful laparoscopic repair include shock on admission, delayed presentation (> 24 h), underlying comorbidi-
                                ties, age > 70 yr, and ASA III to IV. For laparoscopic repair, the patient is often placed in a modified lithotomy posi-
                                tion with the surgeon standing between the legs. In this case, both arms can be left out. Alternatively, the patient may
                                be in a supine position with the surgeon standing on the patient’s left side. In this case, the patient’s left arm should
                                be tucked. The patient should be placed in a reverse Trendelenburg position. Access to the abdomen is obtained
                                at the umbilicus with either a Veress needle or a Hasson technique (peritoneal entry through a ~1 cm skin inci-
                                sion). Two to four additional ports are placed. Generally, the perforation site can be easily identified by laparoscopy.
                                Occasionally, the surgeon may ask the anesthesiologist to insufflate air through an orogastric or nasogastric tube to
                                help localize the perforation site. Several methods of repair have been reported. The most common involves suture
                                closure of the perforation with omentopexy. Occasionally omentopexy or suture repair alone is used. Reports of
                                closure with fibrin glue have also been published, although this technique may be associated with a higher leak rate.
                                Some surgeons will perform endoscopy after repair to ensure adequate closure. Extensive irrigation of the peritoneal
        General Surgery

                                cavity (6–10 L or more) is recommended. The position of the operating table is frequently changed during irrigation
                                to allow better access to the entire abdominal cavity. Adequate irrigation can take 20–30 min. Conversion rates are
                                quite high (10–15%) with inability to localize the perforation the most common reason for conversion to open surgery.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine, low lithotomy

                                 Incision                 3–5 ports

                                 Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv preop

                                 Surgical time            1–1.5 h

                                 Closing                  Port closure only
                                   considerations

                                 Special                  Gastroscope; oro- or nasogastric tube
                                   instrumentation

                                 EBL                      < 75 mL

                                 Postop care              2–4 d hospital stay; liquids on postop day 1

                                 Mortality                Typically < 0.1% (as high as 3% in some series)

                                 Morbidity                6–10% overall, including:
                                                          Abscess (2–8%)
                                                          Suture leak (~5%)
                                                          Ileus (3–6%)
                                                          pneumonia

                                 Pain score               3

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                40–60 yr

                                 Male:Female              May be slightly more common in males
                          584

===== PAGE 585 =====
Laparoscopic Esophageal Fundoplication             585

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence               ~10% lifetime risk for perforation

                     Etiology                May be related to Helicobacter pylori infection; NSAID use; stress; corticosteroid use

                     Associated              gastrinoma; MEN type 1; COPD; CRF; up to 20% may be in shock at the time of admission
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, p. 591.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Lunevicius R, Morkevicius M: Management strategies, early results, benefits, and risk factors of laparoscopic repair of
                        perforated peptic ulcer. World J Surg 2005; 29(10):1299–310.
                     2. Sanabria AE, Morales CH, Villegas MI: Laparoscopic repair for perforated peptic ulcer disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
                        2005; 4:CD004778.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC ESOPHAGEAL FUNDOPLICATION

                                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                    Description: Approximately 40% of Americans suffer from heartburn, and most cases are treated medically.
                   Indications for esophageal fundoplication (to ↑ lower esophageal sphincter pressure) include complications of
                    GERD, such as stricture, respiratory problems, esophageal ulcerations, and Barrett’s esophagus (a premalignant
                    condition). Other indications include failure of medical management or an unwillingness to submit to a lifetime of
                    medication. Most patients with GERD are treated laparoscopically; those undergoing laparoscopic fundoplication
                    have the benefits of a minimally invasive approach—decreased pain, earlier return of GI function, earlier ambula-
                    tion, earlier discharge, quicker return to normal activities, decreased incidence of wound infections and hernias.
                    The most common fundoplication is the Nissen (360°) wrap and its variations include the Rossetti modification,
                    a Toupet (270° posterior) wrap, and the Dor (anterior) wrap. Before surgery, patients with GERD should have
                    documented esophageal hyperacidity (by either pH probe or by esophagitis revealed on upper endoscopy), and
                    also should have a hypotensive sphincter (demonstrated on manometry). Typically, they will have been treated
                    with proton pump inhibitors (e.g., lansoprazole) and sometimes with prokinetic agents (e.g., metoclopramide).
                    The patient is placed supine in a low lithotomy position, with the surgeon standing between the legs. The abdo-
                    men is entered ~2 cm above the umbilicus with either a closed (Veress needle: blind placement) or open (Hasson
                    trocar: direct visual placement through small skin incision) technique. A total of five trocars are inserted—two
                    in the LUQ, two in the RUQ, and one at the umbilicus. The stomach should be decompressed either with an OG
                    tube or with a gastroscope. The liver is elevated with a liver retractor, and the gastroesophageal (GE) junction and
                    both diaphragmatic crura are dissected out. The hiatus should be closed with one or two sutures. The esophagus is
                    encircled (Fig. 7.7-1A), and the vagal nerves are identified and preserved. The short gastrics are then taken down
                    to decrease tension on the wrap. The fundus is brought in through the retroesophageal window (Fig. 7.7-2). An
                    esophageal dilator (56–60 Fr) generally is placed (often by the anesthesiologist) to calibrate the wrap. Passage of
                    the dilator is possibly the most hazardous part of the procedure because it may cause perforation of the esopha-
                    gus at the GE junction. As the dilator approaches the stomach, it is important to watch the junction on the video
                    monitors to ensure that the dilator is not being held at an angle that will risk perforation. The anesthesiologist
                    should stop passing the dilator immediately if any resistance is felt. The dilator is withdrawn. An NG tube may be
                    placed at this time.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Open surgery (see Esophageal Surgery, p. 490) may be indicated if the
                   patient has had previous gastric surgery or if there is a complication with an ongoing laparoscopic procedure. In the
                    Rossetti modification, the short gastrics are not taken down, which decreases operative time. The Dor fundopli-
                    cation is an anterior hemifundoplication in which the fundus is wrapped and sutured to the left and right sides of
                    the esophagus and to the left and right crura, but anteriorly. A Dor fundoplication is often used in combination with
                    a Heller myotomy for treatment of achalasia. A Toupet procedure (Fig. 7.7-1B) is a posterior hemifundoplication

===== PAGE 586 =====
586   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     A                                                       B

                                          Figure 7.7-1. A: Nissen fundoplication. B: Partial fundoplication (Toupet procedure).

                                in which the two walls of the fundus do not actually meet. The stomach is sewn to the left and right walls of the
                                esophagus and then are anchored to the right and left crura. In the past, these procedures were performed com-
        General Surgery

                                monly in patients with a high risk of postop dysphagia (e.g., those who have impaired esophageal peristalsis or a
                                preop stricture). Now, because of their higher failure rate, they are seldom performed except in patients with severe
                                esophageal dysmotility, such as patients with scleroderma. These procedures are identical to the Nissen fundoplica-
                                tion except for the wrap itself.

                                                                                         Duodenum

                                                                                            Stomach

                                         Figure 7.7-2. Gastric fundus is pulled posteriorly and to the right of the esophagus,
                                         with the fundus itself used as a retractor, reaching from right to left behind the esophagus
                                         to grasp the fundus and retract it back to the right side behind the esophagus. Placing
                                         caudad traction on the wrapped fundus, the GE junction and distal esophagus can be
                                         brought further into the abdominal cavity. (Reproduced with permission from Baker
                                         RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 587 =====
Laparoscopic Esophageal Fundoplication             587

                   Usual preop diagnosis: GERD, with or without esophagitis, esophageal stricture, or Barrett’s esophagus

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine low lithotomy

                     Incision                Five ports, upper abdomen

                     Special                 Harmonic scalpel; bipolar cautery or endoscope. Esophageal dilators should be available.
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           1.5–2.5 h

                     Closing                 Port closures only; muscle relaxation may be needed for fascial closure
                       considerations

                     EBL                     < 75 mL

                     Postop care             1–2 d hospital stay; liquids on pod 1

                     Mortality               < 0.1%

                     Morbidity               Overall: 8%
                                             Atelectasis: common
                                             Esophageal or gastric perforation: rare (most commonly associated with passage
                                             of NG tube or esophageal dilator)

                                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                                             Hemorrhage from short gastrics or splenic tear
                                             Pneumothorax (does not usually require treatment)
                                             Postop dysphagia

                     Pain score              4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               All ages (incidence ↑ with age). May be performed in infants; next peak occurs in adulthood; rare
                                             in children and adolescents.

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               1% (increasing significantly over past 5 yr)

                     Etiology                Unknown

                     Associated              Aspiration risk; reactive airway disease; occasionally, respiratory problems associated with
                       conditions            chronic aspiration

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, p. 591.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bammer TM, Hinder RA, Klaus A, et al: Five-to eight-year outcome of the first laparoscopic Nissen fundoplications.
                        J Gastrointest Surg 2001; 5(1):42–8.
                     2. Champion JK, McKernan JB: Laparoscopic Toupet fundoplication. In: Zucker KA, ed. Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 401–8.
                     3. Cowgill SM, Gillman R, Kraemer E, et al: Ten year follow up after laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication for gastroesophageal
                        reflux disease. Am Surg 2007; 73(8):748–53.
                     4. Dallemagne B: Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. In: Ballantyne GH, ed. Atlas of Laparoscopic Surgery. WB Saunders,
                        Philadelphia: 2000, 92–101.
                     5. Hughes SG, Chekan EG, Ali A, et al: Unusual complications following laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. Surg Laparosc
                        Endosc Percutan Tech 1999; 9(2):143–7.
                     6. Zucker KA: Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication technique. In: Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 375–400.

===== PAGE 588 =====
588   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                LAPAROSCOPIC HELLER MYOTOMY ± ANTIREFLUX
                                PROCEDURE
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Laparoscopic and thoracoscopic esophageal myotomies have become much more common over
                                the last 5 yr as confidence in laparoscopic esophageal surgery—particularly antireflux surgery—has increased. These
                                procedures are performed for achalasia, an uncommon condition in which the lower esophageal sphincter fails to
                                relax with swallowing, and in which the body of the esophagus is aperistaltic and dilates. Patients typically complain
                                of dysphagia with chest pain and may experience regurgitation. The etiology of this condition remains unknown.
                                Treatment options consist of pneumatic dilation, botulinum toxin injection of the lower esophageal sphincter, or sur-
                                gical myotomy. Pneumatic dilation remains the most common procedure performed for achalasia and is effective
                                in ~60% of patients. Many gastroenterologists are reluctant to perform this procedure, however, because of the risk
                                of esophageal perforation, which is generally considered to be ~3–5%, but may be as high as 10%. Botulinum toxin
                                injection is a newer technique that is effective to some degree in most patients, but the duration of its effectiveness is
                                short. Most patients require retreatment within 1.5 yr, and the efficacy of retreatment may diminish over time. In many
                                centers, surgical myotomy (Heller’s operation) has become the procedure of choice for the treatment of achalasia.
                                The patient is positioned as for a laparoscopic antireflux procedure—supine in the lithotomy position with reverse
                                Trendelenburg. The abdomen is usually entered with a Veress needle (blind) or Hasson trocar (direct vision) at the
                                umbilicus, and five laparoscopic ports are placed across the upper abdomen—two beneath the left costal margin, two
        General Surgery

                                beneath the right costal margin, and one in the midline either at the umbilicus or midway between the umbilicus and
                                the xiphoid. The liver is elevated, and the ligamentous attachments anterior to the esophagus are divided. The esoph-
                                agus is not usually encircled; and, as hiatal hernias are uncommon with achalasia, crural repair is seldom necessary.
                                The myotomy is begun at the gastroesophageal junction using monopolar cautery, bipolar scissors, or a harmonic
                                scalpel (ultrasonic cutting/coagulation). It is carried proximally until normal musculature is encountered. Some sur-
                                geons perform intraop esophagoscopy to ensure that the myotomy has been carried proximally enough and that
                                there has not been a mucosal perforation. Generally, a myotomy of 5–8 cm is adequate, although sometimes a longer
                                myotomy may be necessary. Some surgeons then perform a very loose, partial fundoplication to prevent reflux. This
                                can be performed as an anterior or posterior fundoplication, bringing the fundus either anterior (Dor fundoplication–
                                our preference) or posterior (Toupet fundoplication) to the esophagus. The stomach is secured to the esophageal wall
                                and crura with sutures, and an NG tube may be passed. The ports are removed and port closure carried out.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Although most of these procedures are being performed laparoscopically,
                                they also can be performed by thoracoscopy or thoracotomy. If a thoracoscopy or thoracotomy is performed, a DLT
                                is placed to allow collapse of the left lung.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Achalasia

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine lithotomy, reverse Trendelenburg

                                 Incision                 Five ports, upper abdomen

                                 Special                  Laparoscopic instrumentation ± gastroscope
                                   instrumentation

                                 Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time            1.5–2 h

                                 Closing                  None
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                      Minimal

                                 Postop care              2-d hospital stay; liquids on pod 1

===== PAGE 589 =====
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, ± Common Duct Exploration                     589

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Mortality                Rare

                     Morbidity                Insignificant atelectasis: Common
                                              Esophageal or gastric perforation: Rare
                                              Pneumothorax (does not usually require treatment)
                                              Gastroesophageal reflux: > 15%

                     Pain score               4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                20–40 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                Achalasia: 1 in 20,000 adults

                     Etiology                 Unknown

                     Associated               None. Chagas’ disease may produce identical esophageal findings.
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, p. 591.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Bonatti H, Hinder RA, Klocker J, et al: Long-term results of laparoscopic Heller myotomy with partial fundoplication for the
                        treatment of achalaisa. Am J Surg 2005; 190(6):874–8.
                     2. Bonavina L: Minimally invasive surgery for esophageal achalasia. World J Gastroenterol 2006; 12(37):5291–5.
                     3. Jeansonne LO, White BC, Pilger KE, et al: Ten-year follow-up of laparoscopic Heller myotomy for achalasia shows durability.
                        Surg Endosc 2007; 21(9):1498–1502.
                     4. Sharp KW, Khaitan L, Scholz S, et al: 100 minimally invasive Heller myotomies: lessons learned. Ann Surg 2002; 235(5):631–9.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY, ± COMMON DUCT
                   EXPLORATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: This operation typically is performed for symptomatic gallstones or acute cholecystitis. A laparoscopic
                   approach is preferred over an open cholecystectomy because of its minimally invasive nature, which allows earlier
                   recovery and return to normal activities. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy may be contraindicated for patients with
                   uncorrectable coagulopathy, severe COPD, or severe cardiac disease (unable to tolerate ↑ intraabdominal pressure).
                   In addition, patients with prior abdominal surgery or with acute cholecystitis are at a higher risk for conversion to
                   open surgery. The operation begins with access to the abdominal cavity at the umbilicus, either with a Veress needle
                   (closed technique: blind placement) or a Hasson trocar (open technique: ↓ risk of vascular, bowel, and bladder injury).
                   If a Veress needle is to be used, the patient will need an OG tube and a Foley catheter to decompress the stomach and
                   bladder before proceeding. CO2 is insufflated to an intraabdominal pressure of 15 mm Hg. If the patient develops
                   ventilatory or hemodynamic problems, consider decreasing the intraabdominal pressure to 10–12 mm Hg. A total of
                   four trocars are used—one at the umbilicus and three in the RUQ. The patient is placed in a reverse Trendelenburg
                   position and rotated to the left to move the stomach, duodenum, and transverse colon away from the operative field.

===== PAGE 590 =====
General Surgery   590   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                          Figure 7.7-3. Surgical anatomy for laparoscopic cholecystectomy and common duct
                                          exploration.

                                The cystic artery and cystic duct (with hepatic duct = triangle of Calot) are clipped and cut (Fig. 7.7-3). The gallbladder
                                is then dissected off the liver with monopolar cautery, placed in a bag, and brought out, usually through the umbilical
                                cord site. Hemostasis is then achieved, the area is irrigated with NS, and the 10-mm trocar sites are closed. The rate
                                of conversion to an open operation is ~5% for elective gallbladder surgery and ~10% for acute cholecystitis. Should
                                this occur, the operation is then converted to an open cholecystectomy (see p. 572).
                                Cholangiography can be added easily to the laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A clip is placed high on the cystic duct;
                                then a small incision is made in the duct just beneath the clip. A cholangiocatheter may be introduced and dye
                                injected into the biliary tree. X-rays—either fluoroscopy or, more commonly, hard copy—are used to assess the bili-
                                 ary anatomy and to look for stones within the ductal system. Cholangiography carries few risks, generally adds about
                                 10–15 min to the procedure, and can be used to identify the important anatomy ~85% of the time. Some surgeons
                                 perform it routinely during all cholecystectomies; others perform it selectively and only if there is evidence that the
                                 patient has had common duct stones or if the anatomy is in question.
                                In rare circumstances, laparoscopic common duct exploration may be carried out to treat common duct stones.
                                A number of techniques have been used, most employing a thin fiberoptic choledochoscope passed through the
                                cystic duct into the common duct. This procedure is performed in only a relatively few centers. More commonly,
                                endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) will be used, either preop or postop, to demonstrate
                                the presence or absence of stones and to remove any stones that are found.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Open cholecystectomy (p. 572) remains the major alternative to laparoscopic
                                cholecystectomy, either because the cholecystectomy is predicted to be technically difficult or because of the illness of
                                the patient. Approximately 5% or less of laparoscopic cholecystectomies are converted to open cholecystectomy intraop
                                because of difficulties with the procedure. ERCP remains the most common means of treating choledocholithiasis in the
                                industrialized world with laparoscopic techniques used in a relatively small number of centers and by a small number of
                                surgeons. Open common duct exploration is occasionally necessary for stones not retrievable by ERCP (generally < 5%).

===== PAGE 591 =====
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, ± Common Duct Exploration            591

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Acute or chronic cholecystitis, usually with cholelithiasis, with or without choledocholithiasis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               For upper abdominal ports

                     Special                Routine laparoscopic instruments. May require fluoroscopy and choledochoscopes for cholangi-
                       instrumentation      ography, common duct exploration; OG tube

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time          0.5–2 h; may be longer for common duct exploration.

                     Closing                Muscular relaxation helpful for closure of umbilical port site
                       considerations

                     EBL                    Minimal

                     Postop care            Usual discharge within 24 h

                     Mortality              < 1/1000

                     Morbidity              Bile leak: 1%
                                            Common duct injury: 0.5%
                                            Hemorrhage (requiring transfusion)
                                            Infection

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                            Injury to bowel
                                            Major vascular injury: Uncommon

                     Pain score             3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Typically adult, increasing with age

                     Male:Female            Female > Male

                     Incidence              Common

                     Etiology               Stone disease. Risk factors = female gender, age, parity, obesity.

                     Associated             Hemolytic anemia for pigmented stones
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: repair of perforated peptic ulcer; laparoscopic esophageal fundoplication; laparoscopic
                   Heller’s myotomy and antireflux surgery; laparoscopic cholecystectomy)

                        PREOPERATIVE: LAPAROSCOPIC FUNDOPLICATION/HELLER’S
                         MYOTOMY
                   Indication for surgery include failed optimal medical management, high volume reflux, severe esophagitis, and be-
                   nign stricture. Severe reflux may lead to airway and pulmonary symptoms as well.

                    Respiratory              Patients may have a history of gastroesophageal reflux resulting in aspiration, particu-
                                             larly when recumbent. Recurrent aspiration may result in bronchospasm, pneumonia, and
                                             chronic pneumonitis. A prolonged history of reflux may give rise to premalignant Barrett’s
                                             esophagus, which may result in stricture formation and weakness of the esophageal wall.

===== PAGE 592 =====
592   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                Respiratory              Achalasia may result in severe regurgitation and aspiration. Pulmonary physiological
                                  (cont’d)               changes include both restrictive and obstructive lung defects and broncho-alveolar injury.
                                                         Physical exam may show wheezing, and rhonchi.
                                                         Tests: Consider PA & lateral CXR. Consider baseline arterial blood gases and pulmonary
                                                         function tests if significant compromise of pulmonary function is present.

                                Cardiovascular           Patients with both reflux and achalasia may present with chest pain. Typically the pain of
                                                         reflux is sharp and substernal. Chest pain in achalasia may radiate to the neck, back, and
                                                         arms and may be difficult to differentiate from pain of cardiac origin. Differentiation should
                                                         be made before surgery both by careful history taking and appropriate tests.
                                                         Tests: Consider ECG (r/o MI as cause of pain), exercise or chemical stress testing if source
                                                         of chest pain remains unclear. Other tests as indicated from H&P.

                                Laboratory               Patients with severe inflammation and erosion may suffer from an iron deficiency anemia.
                                                         Consider CBC. Otherwise as indicated from H&P.

                                Premedication            These patients may be at risk for aspiration and should be treated with full-stomach pre-
                                                         cautions. H2 antagonists and continue proton pump inhibitors.

                                     PREOPERATIVE: LAPAROSCOPIC CHOLECYSTECTOMY
                                The preop evaluation of patients undergoing open cholecystectomy is discussed under Anesthetic Considerations
                                for Biliary Tract Surgery, p. 580.
        General Surgery

                                Respiratory              Patients presenting for laparoscopic cholecystectomy may present electively or acutely.
                                                         Increasingly, cholecystectomy is performed in patients with acute cholecystitis. Patients
                                                         presenting acutely may experience severe abdominal pain, leading to diaphragmatic splint-
                                                         ing and basal lung atelectasis.
                                                         During the procedure, intraabdominal CO2 insufflation → atelectasis, ↓ FRC, ↑ PIP,
                                                         ↑ PaCO2 and ↓ PaO2; therefore, laparoscopic procedures may be contraindicated
                                                         in patients with severe respiratory or cardiovascular disease. Postop respiratory
                                                         function, however, is less impaired (e.g., ↓ FRC 30% vs. 50%) and is recovered more
                                                         quickly (24 h vs. 72 h) in patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy than in the
                                                         open procedure.

                                Systemic                 Patients presenting for laparoscopic cholecystectomy with acute cholecystitis may have
                                                         evidence of mild to moderate sepsis. They may be febrile, tachycardic, and hypotensive and
                                                         need resuscitation prior to surgery.

                                Laboratory               CBC. Consider T&S in patients with recurrent and chronic gall bladder disease. They
                                                         may have liver adhesions. During the acute inflammatory stage there may be ↑ vascularity
                                                         → bleeding.

                                Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv unless patient is unstable or septic. If urgent surgery, check
                                                         for recent administration of analgesics.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                Induction                Laparoscopic fundoplication and Heller’s myotomy: Consider full stomach precautions
                                                         and rapid sequence intubation technique (p. B-5). Additional iv access may be required if
                                                         the arms are inaccessible.
                                                         Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: Standard induction (p. B-2). In acutely unwell patients,
                                                         despite resuscitation, patients may be more susceptible to the effects of anesthesia, and
                                                          positive pressure ventilation. Consider additional iv access, invasive arterial pressure mon-
                                                          itoring, and central access in unstable patients. Etomidate may be a useful induction agent
                                                          in this setting. OG/NGT prior to incision to ensure stomach decompressed.

===== PAGE 593 =====
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, ± Common Duct Exploration              593

                    Maintenance        Standard maintenance (p. B-2). Continue muscle relaxation. Intraabdominal CO2 insuffla-
                                       tion will → ↑ intraabdominal pressure, which will predispose to passive regurgitation of
                                       gastric contents. In addition, intraabdominal pressure > 15 mm Hg → ↓ venous return +
                                       ↑ SVR → ↓ CO. Controlled ventilation will minimize the possibility of hypercarbia from
                                       absorbed CO2.

                    Emergence          Given the high incidence of PONV, prophylactic antiemetic rx (e.g., ondansetron 4 mg iv)
                                       recommended and should be given 30–60 min before the end of the case (p. B-2).

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 16–18 ga × 1                     Blood loss typically minimal with these procedures,
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                 but potential for major bleeding exists. Consider
                                       Fluid warmer                         additional iv access, conversion to open procedure
                                                                            if risk factors for increased bleeding present.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (p. B-1)           Others as clinically indicated. Prevent hypothermia
                                       Urinary catheter                     (forced-air warmer, warming blanket, warm OR,
                                       OG/NG tube                           etc.)

                    Positioning        3 and pad pressure points             Initially in Trendelenburg position (↑ venous
                                       3 eyes                               return, ↓ lung volumes, potential for mainstem
                                                                             intubation) for trocar placement; then reverse
                                                                             
                                                                             Trendelenburg (↓ venous return, ↑ lung vol-
                                                                             umes) during subsequent portions of the surgical
                                                                             procedure.

                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                    Complications      Respiratory:                          Pneumoperitoneum with CO2 allows the surgeon
                                          Pneumoperitoneum                   to operate laparoscopically. This creates cephalad
                                          Hypercarbia/hypoxemia              displacement of the diaphragm with ↓ FRC, ↓ pul-
                                          Pneumothorax                       monary compliance, and atelectasis. This can mani-
                                          Pneumomediastinum                  fest as ↑ PIP, ↓ PO2 and ↑ PCO2. Ventilation should
                                          Endobronchial intubation          be controlled during the operation to minimize the
                                                                            effects of pneumoperitoneum and hypercarbia. An
                                                                            increase in MV is appropriate. Pneumothorax can
                                                                            occur 2° retroperitoneal dissection of insufflated
                                                                            CO2. Pneumothorax will manifest as ↓ PO2, ↑ PIP,
                                                                            hemodynamic instability (↑ HR, ↓ BP), and possibly
                                                                            subcutaneous emphysema. The position of the ETT
                                                                            may change with altered patient position → endo-
                                                                            bronchial intubation.
                                       Cardiovascular:                      ↓ BP can occur 2° patient positioning (reverse Tren-
                                         ↓ BP                               delenburg) and from ↓ venous return 2° pneumoperi-
                                         Hemorrhage                         toneum (↑ intraabdominal pressure > 15 mm Hg).
                                         Dysrhythmias                       Hemorrhage can result from inadvertent injury to
                                                                            blood vessels (during trocar placement). Vascular
                                                                            injection of CO2 (air embolism) can cause
                                                                            ↓ BP, dysrhythmias, and even cardiovascular col-
                                                                            lapse. If cardiopulmonary compromise occurs, the
                                                                            pneumoperitoneum can be released to allow for dif-
                                                                            ferential diagnosis and treatment.
                                       Visceral injury                      Injury to the viscera may necessitate an open pro-
                                                                            cedure or may go undiagnosed and → other p     ostop
                                                                            complications, depending on the organ that is
                                                                            injured. At all times, be prepared to convert to an
                                                                             open procedure.
                                       Hypothermia                           2° dry gas insufflation
                                       Subcutaneous emphysema                Keep CO2 insufflation pressure < 12 mm Hg.

===== PAGE 594 =====
594   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                 Complications               PONV (common)
                                                             Shoulder pain                               From pneumoperitoneum; usually self-limited
                                                                                                         (p. B-2).
                                                             Respiratory                                 Typical postoperative complications are secondary
                                                                                                         to pneumoperitoneum but mainly to pain.

                                 Pain                        PCA (see p. C-3).                           Shoulder pain responds to ketorolac (15–30 mg iv),
                                   management                Oxycodone/hydrocodone in com-               or other NSAIDs provided there are no
                                                             bination with acetaminophen                 contraindications.

                                 Tests                       As indicated from H&P

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Cunningham AJ, Nolan C: Anesthesia for minimally invasive surgery. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting, RK, eds. Clinical
                                     Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1061–71.
                                  2. Feteiha MS, Curet MJ: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In: Zucker KA, ed. Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition. Lippincott
                                     Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 121–32.
                                  3. Gadacz TR: Update on laparoscopic cholecystectomy, including a clinical pathway. Surg Clin North Am 2000; 80:1127–50.
                                  4. Gurbuz AT, Peetz ME: The acute abdomen in the pregnant patient. Is there a role for laparoscopy? Surg Endosc 1997; 11(2):98–102.
                                  5. Hein HA: Hemodynamic changes during laparoscopic cholecystectomy in patients with severe cardiac disease. J Clin Anesth
                                     1997; 9(4):261–5.
        General Surgery

                                  6. Keus F, Broeders IA, van Laarhoven J: Gallstone disease: surgical aspects of symptomatic and acute cholecystitis. Best Pract
                                     Res Clin Gastroenterol 2006; 20(6):1031–51.
                                  7. Keus F, de Jong JA, Gooszen HG, et al: Laparoscopic versus open cholecystectomy for patients with symptomatic
                                     cholecystolithiasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 18(4):CD006231.
                                  8. Nakeeb A, Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA: Calculous biliary disease. In: Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Lillemone MB, Dohersy GM,
                                     eds. Greenfield’s Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 978–98.

===== PAGE 595 =====
Laparoscopic Splenectomy         595

                   LAPAROSCOPIC SPLENECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Laparoscopic-assisted splenectomy is best suited for normal or slightly enlarged spleens (e.g.,
                   idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura [ITP]). Laparoscopic splenectomy usually is contraindicated in patients
                   who have cancer, large hilar lymph nodes, or portal hypertension. At present, the only absolute contraindication
                   to the procedure is massive splenomegaly, with spleens > 30 cm in the longitudinal axis. There is a high conver-
                   sion rate (to open surgery) if the size of the spleen is between 20 and 30 cm. Sometimes a hand-assisted approach
                   may be helpful for spleens in this size range. Conversion rates are higher in patients with perisplenitis and morbid
                   myeloproliferative disorders. For the procedure, patients should be placed on a beanbag in a 45° lateral decubitus
                   position or a full lateral decubitus position. The advantage of the 45° right lateral decubitus position is that it is
                   easy to rotate the table and place the patient in a supine position if there is an urgent need for conversion. With
                   the 45° lateral decubitus or the full lateral decubitus position, the kidney rest should be elevated and the OR table
                   should be flexed to increase the area between the costal margin and the superior iliac crest. All pressure points
                   should be padded, and the patient should be secured firmly to the table. The first trocar site is generally in the
                   LUQ (see Fig. 7.7-5). Access can be with a closed (Veress needle or Optiview trocar) or open (Hasson trocar)
                   approach. The initial approach may be to the hilum, short gastrics, or inferior pole. Most surgeons use the har-
                   monic scalpel to take down the various ligaments and to dissect out the hilum, which generally is stapled with
                   an endo GIA. The short gastrics are either taken down with the harmonic scalpel or are stapled. The lateral and
                   superior attachments are taken down last. The spleen is then placed in a bag. Removal of the spleen can be done
                   in several ways. Some surgeons remove it with a morselizer placed through one of the trocar sites. Others enlarge

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                   one trocar site slightly and remove the spleen in chunks. For very large spleens, some surgeons make a Pfannen-
                   stiel incision and extract it through the pelvis.

                               Figure 7.7-4. Anatomy of the spleen. (Reproduced with permission from Wind
                               GG: The spleen. In Applied Laparoscopic Anatomy: Abdomen and Pelvis. Williams &
                               Wilkins, Baltimore: 1997.)

===== PAGE 596 =====
General Surgery   596   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                            Figure 7.7-5. Trocar location for splenectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-
                                            Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                            Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                Variant procedure or approaches: Open splenectomy (described on p. 645). A hand-assist device can be used
                                for larger spleens. In such a case, a larger incision (~5 cm) is made either in the midline or the pelvis and a hand is
                                inserted to assist in retracting and dissecting the spleen, while improving visualization.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) (60%); hereditary spherocytosis (10%); hemo-
                                lytic anemia (5%); thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) (5%); lymphoma (5%); hypersplenism (5%)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Usually 45° lateral decubitus, OR table flexed, beanbag

                                 Incision                3–5 trocar ports; 1 enlarged to extract spleen

                                 Special                 Vascular staplers; Harmonic scalpel; bipolar instruments
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Patients should have received vaccinations (pneumococcal, meningococcal, Haemophilus influen-
                                   considerations        zae) preop. DVT prophylaxis; ± stress steroids; ± Plt transfusion.

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop

                                 Surgical time           1–3 h

                                 Closing                 Rapid closure not requiring muscle relaxation (following search for accessory spleen)
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     < 100 mL; if significant enough to require transfusion, may require conversion to laparotomy.

                                 Postop care             PACU → ward. Generally begin liquids pod 1 and discharge pod 2.

                                 Mortality               0.1 % (predominately related to underlying disease)

===== PAGE 597 =====
Laparoscopic Splenectomy      597

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity              5%
                                            Hemorrhage
                                            Pulmonary complications
                                            Injury to pancreas, stomach, or splenic flexure of colon

                     Pain score             5–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All ages; more common in adults

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Uncommon

                     Etiology               Hematologic disorders (e.g., ITP, TTP); hemolytic anemia, tumor of the spleen (e.g., Hodgkin’s
                                            disease); hypersplenism

                     Associated             Steroid dependence; neutropenia; thrombocytopenia; hemolytic anemias
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients present for laparoscopic splenectomy with a variety of diseases, including ITP, lymphomatous disease
                   (Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s), autoimmune hemolytic anemia, TTP, hereditary spherocytosis, Evans syndrome,
                   hairy-cell leukemia, hypersplenism 2° portal HTN, sarcoidosis, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis. Open splenec-
                   tomy is usually reserved for traumatic laceration of the spleen. Previous upper abdominal surgery does c ontraindicate
                   a laparoscopic approach. Laparoscopic cases tend to take longer than open splenectomies. Patients who have been
                   treated with chemotherapeutic drugs will require careful preop exam to evaluate for potentially toxic side effects. See
                   Anesthetic Considerations for (open) Splenectomy, p. 647. Patients should receive pneumococcal, meningococcal,
                   and H. influenza vaccinations at least 1 wk preop.

                    Respiratory              Splenomegaly may cause left lower-lobe atelectasis. As intraabdominal CO2 insufflation →
                                             further atelectasis, ↓ FRC, ↑ PIP, ↑ PaCO2 and ↓ PaO2; therefore, laparoscopic procedures
                                             may be contraindicated in patients with advanced lung disease.
                                             Tests: Consider P/A & lateral CXR; ABG and PFTs, if clinically indicated.

                    Cardiovascular           Cardiovascular changes caused by the pneumoperitoneum include ↓ venous return →
                                             ↓ CO and ↑ SVR.

                    Hematologic              Cytopenias are very common.
                                             Tests: CBC with differential & Plt count, T&S, consider T&C. Antibodies may be present
                                             → allow ↑ time for T&S/T&C. Platelet counts typically low but preop platelet transfusion
                                             usually not helpful due to immediate splenic sequestration.

                    Hepatic                  Consider presence of coexisting hepatic dysfunction due to primary disease and/or therapy
                                             for it.
                                             Tests: Hepatic panel, PT/PTT

                    Laboratory               See above. As indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication            Standard premedication (p. B-1).

===== PAGE 598 =====
598   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                Induction                   Standard induction (p. B-2). In patients with coexisting liver disease, modify medica-
                                                            tion choice and dosage accordingly. Place OG/NGT prior to incision to ensure stomach
                                                            decompressed.

                                Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (p. B-2)

                                Emergence                   No special considerations. Prophylactic antiemetics are appropriate.

                                Blood and fluid             IV: 18–16 ga × 1                           Blood loss should be 100 cc. If Plt transfusion is
                                   requirements             NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                       necessary, it should be given after ligation of splenic
                                                            Fluid warmer                               vessels (↓ sequestration). Be prepared to obtain
                                                                                                       more iv access if bleeding is excessive. Consider
                                                                                                       extra iv access if arms inaccessible at the start of the
                                                                                                       case.

                                Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1).                Others as indicated by patient status. Prevent hypo-
                                                            Urinary catheter                           thermia (forced-air warmer, heated and humidified
                                                            OG/NGT                                     inspired gases, warming blanket, warm OR, etc.).

                                Positioning                 ✓ and pad pressure points                  Careful positioning and padding of patient is
                                                            ✓ eyes                                     essential.
        General Surgery

                                General                                                                If the spleen is large (> 20 cm), there is a higher rate
                                  Considerations                                                       of conversion to an open procedure. In particular,
                                                                                                       intraoperative pain will be greater; hence, analgesic
                                                                                                       requirements will be higher.

                                Complications               Respiratory:                               The complications of laparoscopy are discussed in
                                                            Cardiovascular:                            Anesthetic Considerations for Laparoscopic Chole-
                                                            ↓ BP                                       cystectomy, p. 591.
                                                            Hemorrhage                                 Likely convert to open with significant hemorrhage.
                                                            Visceral injury                            Plt transfusion may be necessary.
                                                            Hypothermia
                                                            Subcutaneous emphysema

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               Shoulder pain                              2° pneumoperitoneum; usually self-limited. Ketor-
                                                                                                       olac (30 mg iv) or other NSAIDs effective.
                                                            PONV                                       See p. B-2.
                                                            Atelectasis                                Usually left lower lobe

                                Pain                        PCA (p. C-3). A multimodal approach to analgesia is useful in these patients. Be cautious
                                  management                with NSAIDs in patients with coexisting bone marrow disease.

                                Tests                       As indicated by patient status.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Fraker DL: The Spleen. In Greenfield’s Surgery Scientific Principles and Practice, 5th Edition, Mulholland MW, Lillemoe KD,
                                     Doherty GM, et al, editors, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1212–39.
                                  2. Grahn SW, Alvarez J, Kirkwood K: Trends in laparoscopic splenectomy for massive splenomegaly. Arch Surg 2006; 141(8):755–62.
                                  3. Katkhouda N, Mavor E: Laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg Clin North Am 2000; 80:1285–98.
                                  4. Pace DE, Chiasson PM, Schlachta CM, et al: Laparoscopic splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Surg
                                     Endosc 2003; 17(1):95–8.
                                  5. Rescoria RJ: Laparoscopic splenectomy. Semin Pediatr Surg 2002; 11(4):226–32.

===== PAGE 599 =====
Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy          599

                     6. Sampath S, Meneghetti AT, MacFarlane JK, et al: An 18-year review of open and laparoscopic splenectomy for idiopathic
                        thrombocytopenic purpura. Am J Surg 2007; 193(5): 580–3.
                     7. Tavakkoli A: The Spleen. In Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 12th edition, Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. McGraw-Hill
                        Medical, New York: 2013.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC ADRENALECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy typically is performed for a variety of adrenal problems including
                   Conn’s disease, functioning adenoma, pheochromocytoma, Cushing’s disease, hyperplasia, virilizing or feminiz-
                   ing tumors, and an enlarging, nonfunctioning adenoma. Urologists generally use a retroperitoneal approach,
                   whereas other surgeons use a transabdominal approach. The patient should be on a beanbag in the full lateral
                   decubitus position (Fig. 7.7-6). The kidney rest should be elevated, and the table should be flexed to open up the
                   area between the costal margin and iliac crest. A left adrenalectomy is typically easier than a right adrenalectomy.
                   On the left side, three trocars are required along the costal margin. Surgery begins by immobilizing the spleen
                   and the colon laterally, which allows the spleen to fall away completely from the adrenal gland. The adrenal is
                   then seen behind the hilum of the spleen. Care should be taken to minimize manipulation of a pheochromocy-
                   toma to prevent sudden, unexpected HTN during the operation. In general, most surgeons prefer to clip and

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   cut the adrenal vein first. After the adrenal is completely mobilized, it is removed through one of the port sites.
                   For a right-sided approach, four trocars generally are required along the costal margin. The 4th trocar is used to
                   retract the liver. The first step on the right side is to mobilize the lateral attachments of the liver to expose the
                   adrenal. An enlarged right adrenal may be difficult to mobilize enough to see the adrenal vein because the right
                   adrenal vein empties directly into the IVC. Most surgeons recommend using an endo GIA stapler to divide the
                   right adrenal vein.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Open procedure (p. 683) or retroperitoneal approach
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Indeterminate adrenal mass (nonfunctional adenoma); also can be performed for func-
                   tional adenomas, rarely for pheochromocytoma. Contraindicated for known carcinoma.

                        A                                                                     B

                               Figure 7.7-6. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy. A: Patient positioning and port locations.
                               B: Anatomic relationships of adrenals (sutured) to adjacent and overlying structures.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative
                               Anatomy, 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 600 =====
600   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Lateral decubitus. A patient with bilateral disease may need repositioning between sides; or sur-
                                                         geon may use a supine approach.

                                 Incision                3 ports on left side; 4 ports on right side

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h

                                 Closing                 Brief closure; muscle relaxation helpful for fascial repair
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     < 75 mL, although occasionally significant blood loss may occur.

                                 Postop care             Patient usually discharged on pod 1 or 2, depending on BP control.

                                 Mortality               < 0.1%

                                 Morbidity               Hemorrhage/hematoma
                                                         Injury to pancreas or kidney
                                                         UTI
                                                         DVT

                                 Pain score              4
        General Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               All ages

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Varies with underlying disorder

                                 Etiology                Pheochromocytoma (25%); nonfunctioning adenomas, aldosteronoma (21%); cortisol-producing
                                                         adenoma (15%); Cushing’s disease (8%)

                                 Associated              Depending on function of tumor (e.g., HTN for aldosteronoma, Cushing’s disease)
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                The preop evaluation of patients undergoing laparoscopic adrenalectomy is discussed under Anesthetic Consider-
                                ations for (open) Adrenalectomy, p. 687.

                                 Cardiovascular           Cardiovascular changes caused by the pneumoperitoneum include ↓ venous return →
                                                          ↓ CO and ↑ SVR. Decreased blood flow to the splanchnic and renal circulations (→ ↓ UO)
                                                          may result from high intraabdominal pressures.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA. An epidural should not be necessary for postop analgesia if the procedure is per-
                                formed laparoscopically. If the surgical team feels that there is a high likelihood of conversion to an open procedure,
                                consider placement of an epidural catheter for postop analgesia.

                                Induction                 See induction under (open) Adrenalectomy, p. 687.

                                Maintenance               See maintenance under (open) Adrenalectomy, p. 687.

===== PAGE 601 =====
Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy          601

                    Emergence                See emergence under (open) Adrenalectomy, p. 688. Case is likely to take longer if per-
                                             formed laparoscopically, but usually has a less painful postop course. Prophylactic anti-
                                             emetics are appropriate.

                    Blood and fluid          IV: 16–14 ga × 1                         Warming techniques important (forced-air warm-
                       requirements          NS/LR @5–15 mL/kg/h                      ers, fluid warmers, humidified inspired gases, etc.).

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                             UO
                                             Arterial line
                                             ± CVP catheter
                                             ± PA catheter                            A PA catheter may be useful in the management of
                                                                                      patients with pheochromocytoma.
                                             TEE                                       TEE may be helpful to evaluate cardiac function
                                                                                       and filling.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points                Careful support and padding of extremities and
                                             3 eyes                                   torso is very important.

                    Complications:           Respiratory:                             The complications of laparoscopy are discussed in
                      laparoscopic              Pneumoperitoneum                      Anesthetic Considerations for Laparoscopic Chole-
                                                Hypercarbia/hypoxemia                 cystectomy, p. 591.
                                                Pneumothorax
                                                Pneumomediastinum
                                                Endobronchial intubation

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                                             Cardiovascular:
                                                ↓ BP
                                                Hemorrhage
                                                Dysrhythmias
                                             Visceral injury
                                             Subcutaneous emphysema
                                             Hypothermia

                    Complications:           Pheochromocytoma:                        Rx: intraop HTN with SNP or phentolamine (2.5–5
                      endocrine                BP lability                            mg q 5 min); ↑ HR with esmolol; ↓ BP with phen-
                                               Myocardial dysfunction                 ylephrine or dopamine. (See Anesthetic Consider-
                                                                                      ations for Adrenalectomy, p. 687.)
                                             Conn’s syndrome:                         See Anesthetic Considerations for Adrenalectomy,
                                               CHF 2° hypervolemia                    p. 687.
                                               ↓ BP
                                               Electrolyte disturbances
                                               Hyperglycemia
                                             Cushing’s syndrome:                      Continue replacement steroids. (See Anesthetic
                                               ↓ BP                                   Considerations for Adrenalectomy, p. 687.)
                                               Acute adrenal insufficiency

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            PONV                                     See p. B-2.
                                             Shoulder pain                            Consider ketorolac 30 mg iv.

                    Pain                     PCA (p. B-5)                             See Anesthetic Considerations for Adrenalectomy,
                      management                                                      p. 687.

                    Tests                    As indicated

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Area MJ, Gagner M: Laparoscopic management of adrenal lesions. In: Zucker KA, ed. Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 635–42.

===== PAGE 602 =====
602   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                  2. Ciriac J, Weizman D, Urback DR: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for the management of benign and malignant adrenal tumors.
                                     Expert Rev Med Devices 2006; 3(6):777–86.
                                  3. Hasan R, Harold KL, Matthews BD, et al: Outcomes for laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech
                                     A 2000; 12(4):233–6.
                                  4. Horgan S, Sinan M, Helton WS, et al: Use of laparoscopic techniques improves outcome from adrenalectomy. Am J Surg 1997;
                                     173:371–4.
                                  5. Lodin M, Priitera A, Giannone G: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy: keys to success: correct surgical indications, adequate
                                     preoperative preparation, surgical team experience. Surg Laprosc Endosc Percutan Tech 2007; 17(5):392–5.
                                  6. Olson JA, Scher RP: Adrenal gland. In: Lillemoe KD, Doherty GM, et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery Scientific Principles and
                                     Practice, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1325–45.
                                  7. Raeburn CD, McIntyre RC Jr: Laparoscopic approach to adrenal and endocrine pancreatic tumors. Surg Clin North Am 2000;
                                     80:1427–42.

                                LAPAROSCOPIC BOWEL RESECTION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: The surgical community has not uniformly embraced laparoscopic bowel surgery. It is technically
                                very difficult because the surgeon has to maneuver in several quadrants during the operation. In benign diseases (e.g.,
        General Surgery

                                ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, diverticular disease, and polyps) there are clear advantages to a laparoscopic ap-
                                proach to bowel resection, including decreased pain, earlier return of GI function, earlier ambulation, and earlier dis-
                                charge from the hospital. Although these advantages also apply to the patient with cancer, there are still reservations
                                about whether cure and survival rates are the same. Preliminary data from several ongoing multicenter trials indicate

                                          Figure 7.7-7. Trocar placement for a right colectomy. The general principle is to
                                          place the camera port so that the surgeon’s visual axis is parallel to the telescope,
                                          and to place the working ports so that the operative site is at the apex of an isosceles
                                          triangle. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham
                                          KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 2nd edition. Lippincott-Raven
                                          Publishers, Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 603 =====
Laparoscopic Bowel Resection       603

                   that the length of the specimen and the number of lymph nodes removed are the same with both approaches. Data
                   regarding staging and survival indicate outcomes are similar with laparoscopic or open approaches.
                   For a left-sided colon resection, the patient is placed in a low lithotomy position, while in other bowel resections, a
                   supine position is used. The patient’s arms should be tucked to improve access to all four quadrants. Generally, four
                   to five ports are required, one in each quadrant (Fig. 7.7-7). For a laparoscopic-assisted approach, one of these
                   ports will be enlarged slightly for removal of the specimen. Very often the operating table will need to be tilted or
                   rotated throughout the course of the procedure to help move the small intestines away from the surgical dissection
                   site. The procedure typically begins with localization of the pathology. This may require an intraop sigmoidoscopy
                   if the lesion has not already been marked on colonoscopy or if it is not grossly apparent. The involved section of the
                   intestine is then mobilized. Often, division of the mesentery is done intracorporeally. Occasionally, surgeons will
                   exteriorize the bowel and do extracorporeal division of the mesentery and extracorporeal division of the bowel. For
                   right-sided lesions, the anastomosis typically is done extracorporeally; however, for left-sided lesions, once the bowel
                   is removed, the extraction site will be closed. The pneumoperitoneum will be reinsufflated and the anastomosis will
                   be performed intracorporeally with an end-to-end stapler placed through the anus.
                   Unipolar and bipolar cautery, the harmonic scalpel, and many different surgical staplers may be used during these
                   procedures. These generally require longer operative times than the corresponding open procedures, but typically,
                   they are associated with shorter hospitalization stays and earlier return to work than traditional laparotomy.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Open surgery (see p. 528), laparoscopic-assisted, or totally laparoscopic pro-
                   cedures. Some surgeons also have recommended a hand-assisted procedure where a pneumoperitoneum is still used,
                   but the port site of extraction is enlarged at the beginning of the operation. The surgeon’s hand can be placed through
                   a special sleeve that maintains pneumoperitoneum, but also allows the surgeon to retract and dissect manually. Oc-
                   casionally, the specimen is removed via the anus or through a vaginotomy.

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Intestinal obstruction; inflammatory conditions (e.g., diverticulitis, bleeding, neoplasms);
                   cancer (controversial)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Usually supine; sometimes lithotomy for left-sided procedures

                     Incision               4–5 trocar sites, one in each quadrant. One site will be enlarged for specimen removal and/or
                                            anastomosis in laparoscopic-assisted procedures.

                     Special                Harmonic scalpel, various laparoscopic stapling instruments
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 The operating table will be moved quite frequently to help with visualization.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Ertapenem 1 g iv or 2nd generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefotetan 1–2 g or cefoxitin 1 g iv)

                     Surgical time          1.5–2 h (small bowel resection); 3–4 h (colonic resection). Surgical times will ↑ in the presence
                                            of acute inflammation and as the bowel resection becomes more extensive.

                     Closing                Usually requires closure of several port sites; muscle relaxation helpful.
                       considerations

                     EBL                    < 200 mL

                     Postop care            NG tube seldom used. Most patients begin regular diet within 48 h; discharge, generally 3–4 d.

                     Mortality              < 0.1%

                     Morbidity              < 5% (similar in magnitude to those seen with open operations)
                                            Complications include:
                                               Hemorrhage
                                               Infection
                                               Anastomotic leak
                                               Intestinal obstruction

                     Pain score             6–7

===== PAGE 604 =====
604   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               All ages (increases with age)

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Varies with disease process.

                                 Etiology                Diverticulitis; polyps; inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

                                 Associated              None
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                For respiratory, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, and renal considerations, see Anesthetic Consider-
                                ations for Intestinal and Peritoneal Procedures, p. 641.

                                Additional                 Laparoscopic bowel resection is performed for both malignant and benign disease. Patients
                                  considerations           presenting may have a long history of inflammatory bowel disease such as ulcerative coli-
                                                           tis or Crohn’s disease. Typically they have received medical therapy, surgical treatments
                                                           or both. Medical therapies include 5-aminosalicylic acid compounds and immunosuppres-
                                                           sants, such as corticosteroids and methotrexate. Side effects of medical therapies include
        General Surgery

                                                           interstitial nephritis, pancreatitis, pleuropericarditis (5-aminosalicylic acids) immunosup-
                                                           pression, truncal obesity, diabetes, and hypertension (corticosteroids). Patients who have
                                                           had previous surgery or severe disease may have adhesions making the impending lapa-
                                                           roscopic surgery more technically challenging. Inflammatory bowel disease is associated
                                                           with a number of coexisting conditions including arthritis, uveitis, biliary stasis, which may
                                                          impact on anesthetic management.

                                Tests                     CBC, Renal panel, T&S. Others as per history and physical exam.

                                Premedication             Standard premedication (p. B-2).

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                Induction                 Standard induction (p. B-2). Standard rapid-sequence induction if at risk for aspiration
                                                          (p. B-4). OG/NGT placed prior to incision to decompress the stomach.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-2).

                                Emergence                 No special considerations unless the patient is at risk for aspiration; extubation should then
                                                          occur after the patient is fully awake and has protective airway reflexes.

                                Blood and fluid           IV: 16–18 ga × 1                           Blood loss should be < 200 cc.
                                   requirements           NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h
                                                          Fluid warmer

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1).                Others as indicated by patient status. Prevent
                                                          Urinary catheter                           hypothermia (forced-air warmer, warming blanket,
                                                                                                      warm room, etc.).

                                Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                          ✓ eyes

===== PAGE 605 =====
Laparoscopic Appendectomy             605

                    Complications              Respiratory:                                These complications (associated with the preperi-
                                                 Pneumoperitoneum                          toneal approach), as well as the general complica-
                                                 Hypercarbia/hypoxemia                     tions of laparoscopy, are discussed in Anesthetic
                                                 Pneumothorax                              Considerations for Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy,
                                                 Pneumomediastinum                         p. 591.
                                                 Endobronchial intubation
                                               Cardiovascular:
                                                 ↓ BP
                                                 Dysrhythmias
                                                 Hemorrhage
                                               Visceral injury
                                               Hypothermia
                                               Subcutaneous emphysema

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              PONV                                        See p. B-2.
                                               Shoulder pain                               Ketorolac (30 mg iv) or other NSAIDS

                    Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)
                      management

                    Tests                      As indicated by patient status.

                                                                                                                                                                General Surgery
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. COST (Clinical Outcomes of Surgical Therapy Study Group): A comparison of laparoscopically assisted and open colectomy
                        for colon cancer. N Engl J Med 2004; 350(20):2050–9.
                     2. Favuzza J, Delaney CP: Outcomes of discharge after elective laparoscopic colorectal surgery with transversus abdominis
                        plane blocks and enhanced recovery pathway. J Am Coll Surg 2013; 217(3):503–6.
                     3. Fleshman JW, Sargent DJ, Green E, et al: Laparoscopic colectomy for cancer is not inferior to open surgery based on 5-year
                        data from the COST Study Group trial. Ann Surg 2007; 246(4):655–64.
                     4. Hinojosa MW, Murrell ZA, Konyalian VR: Comparison of laparoscopic vs open sigmoid colectomy for benign and malignant
                        disease at academic medical centers. J Gastrointest Surg 2007; 11(11):1423–30.
                     5. Keshava A, Young CJ, Richardson GL, et al: A historical comparison of single incision and conventional multiport laparoscopic
                        right hemicolectomy. Colorectal Dis 2013; 15(10):e618–22.
                     6. Nishimura A, Kawahara M, Honda K, et al: Totally laparoscopic anterior resection with transvaginal assistance and
                        transvaginal specimen extraction: a technique for natural orifice surgery combined with reduced-port surgery. Surg Endosc
                        2013; 27(12):4734–40.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC APPENDECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Appendectomy generally is performed for suspected appendicitis. The patient is placed in the supine
                   position with the left arm tucked. An OG/NG tube should be inserted to decompress the stomach. Access is obtained
                   at the umbilicus, either through a closed (Veress needle) technique or open (Hasson trocar) technique. If a Veress
                   needle is used, a Foley catheter should be inserted. Two additional trocars are inserted—one suprapubic and the
                   other in the LLQ. The port in the LLQ is a 10/12 mm trocar to allow passage of an endo GIA stapler. Occasionally, a
                   4th trocar may be placed in the RUQ to help with mobilization and retraction. The table will then be rotated to the
                   left side, and the surgeon may ask for it to be placed in Trendelenburg or reverse Trendelenburg position, depending
                   on the location of the cecum. The base of the cecum is identified and the appendix is mobilized (Fig. 7.7-8B). This
                   may require dissection of the peritoneal edge along the right gutter. After the appendix is mobilized, a window is
                   created in the mesoappendix, and the base of the appendix is stapled with an endo GIA. The mesoappendix is then
                   stapled with a vascular-cartridge endo GIA. The appendix generally is placed in a bag prior to delivering it, or it may

===== PAGE 606 =====
606   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                       A                                               B                    Colon
        General Surgery

                                            Figure 7.7-8. Setup and initial view for laparoscopic appendectomy. A: Reproduced
                                            with permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition.
                                            Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003. B: Reproduced with permission from
                                            Wind GG: The spleen. In: Applied Laparoscopic Anatomy: Abdomen and Pelvis. Williams
                                            & Wilkins, Baltimore: 1997.

                                be brought directly through the 10/12-mm trocar. The umbilical fascia is closed, and the skin is loosely approximated.
                                When unexpected pathology is identified, it can be dealt with by laparoscopy or by laparotomy, with incision place-
                                ment dependent on findings.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Open appendectomy (see p. 521) via RLQ or midline incision
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Acute abdomen; possible acute appendicitis

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                3–4 ports (see Fig. 7.7-8A)

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop

                                 Surgical time           60–90 min

                                 Closing                 Muscular relaxation helpful for umbilical closure; NG tube if prolonged ileus anticipated.
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     < 75 mL

                                 Postop care             Patients are hospitalized for varying lengths of time, depending on their need for antibiotics.
                                                         Many with simple acute appendicitis can go home within 24 h.

                                 Mortality               Perforated: 2–5% (nonperforated: < 0.1%); increased in elderly patients and infants.

                                 Morbidity               Overall: 3% if nonperforated; 20–50% with perforation
                                                         Intraabdominal abscess
                                                         Hematoma
                                                         Ileus

===== PAGE 607 =====
Laparoscopic Appendectomy        607

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity (cont’d)     Risk of intraabdominal abscess, mostly dependent on pathology (e.g., early acute inflammation
                                            vs. perforation)
                                            Hemorrhage
                                            Infection
                                            Stump leak: exceedingly rare
                                            Conversion to open procedure: dependent on pathology and experience of surgeon

                     Pain score             4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              All ages; commonly, 19–25 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              Common (7%)

                     Etiology               Acute appendicitis; etiology unknown

                     Associated             Consider other pelvic pathology in women of childbearing age.
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   This patient population is generally fit and healthy, apart from their acutely presenting illness. Full-stomach precau-
                   tions (see p. B-5) are appropriate in these patients.

                    Respiratory              Respiratory impairment can occur 2° acute abdominal pain and splinting. Patients with
                                             acute abdomen should be treated as if they have full stomachs.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular           Cardiovascular changes caused by the pneumoperitoneum include ↓ venous return →
                                             ↓ CO and ↑ SVR. Decreased blood flow to the splanchnic and renal circulations (→ ↓ UO)
                                             may result from high intraabdominal pressures. May be dehydrated from fever, emesis,
                                             and decreased oral intake. Assess volume status with VS and hydrate adequately before
                                             anesthetic induction.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Gastrointestinal         Patient typically has abdominal pain with N/V. Muscular resistance to palpation of
                                             abdominal wall frequently parallels the severity of the inflammatory process. With spread-
                                             ing peritoneal irritation (as with perforation), patient will develop abdominal distension
                                             and paralytic ileus.
                                             Tests: Renal panel, consider pregnancy test

                    Hematologic              Moderate leukocytosis (10,000–18,000) with left shift. Hemoconcentration likely if patient
                                             dehydrated.
                                             Tests: CBC

                    Laboratory               Others as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Patients with acute appendicitis should be treated as if they have full stomachs
                                             (see p. B-5). Ascertain if patient received opiates during ED eval and management. Con-
                                             sider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

===== PAGE 608 =====
608   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA, with rapid-sequence iv induction.

                                Induction                 Preoxygenate patient and have an assistant apply cricoid pressure. Etomidate 0.1–0.4
                                                          mg/kg or propofol 1.5–3 mg/kg + succinylcholine 1.5 mg/kg, for intubation (see p. B-5).
                                                          OG/NGT placed prior to incision to decompress the stomach.

                                Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3), without N2O.

                                Emergence                 Extubate when the patient is awake and with active laryngeal protective reflexes.

                                Blood and fluid           IV: 16–18 ga × 1
                                   requirements           NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1).             Others as indicated by patient status. Prevent hy-
                                                          Urinary catheter                        pothermia (forced-air warmer, warming blanket,
                                                                                                  warm room, etc.)

                                Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points               Trendelenburg position with elevation of the right
                                                          ✓ eyes                                  side of the abdomen improves surgical exposure.
                                                          Secure or tuck arms

                                Complications             Respiratory:                            These complications (associated with the preperi-
                                                            Pneumoperitoneum                      toneal approach), as well as the general complica-
                                                            Hypercarbia/hypoxemia                 tions of laparoscopy, are discussed in Anesthetic
        General Surgery

                                                            Pneumothorax                          Considerations for Lap Cholecystectomy, p. 591.
                                                            Pneumomediastinum
                                                            Endobronchial intubation
                                                          Cardiovascular:
                                                            Hypotension
                                                            Dysrhythmias
                                                          Visceral injury
                                                          Hypothermia
                                                          Subcutaneous emphysema

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications             PONV                                   See p. B-2.
                                                          Urinary retention                      Straight catheterization of the bladder

                                Pain                      PCA (p. C-3)
                                  management              Oral analgesics                        Acetaminophen 650–1000 mg po q 6 h or
                                                          Ketorolac                              Percocet: 1–2 tab po q 6 h 30 mg iv

                                Tests                     As indicated by patient status.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Bennett J, Boddy A, Rhode M: Choice of approach for appendicectomy: a meta-analysis of open versus laparoscopic
                                     appendicectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 2007; 17(4):245–55.
                                  2. Mathews JB, Hodin, RA: The Appendix. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemoe KD, Doherty GM, et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery
                                     Scientific Principles and Practice, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1199–211.

===== PAGE 609 =====
Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Repair          609

                   LAPAROSCOPIC INGUINAL HERNIA REPAIR
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Laparoscopic hernia repair is clearly preferred in patients with recurrent or bilateral hernias (Fig. 7.7-9). In
                   patients with first-time unilateral hernias, there are no clear advantages in terms of operative time, postop pain, time to
                    discharge, or time to return to normal activities, compared with tension-free open repair (see p. 651). There are three
                    types of laparoscopic hernia repairs. The first, ONLAY, generally has been discarded because of high recurrence rates.
                    The other two are the totally extraperitoneal (TEP) and the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) techniques. Of
                    these, the TEP is somewhat more difficult to learn, but is associated with lower recurrence rates and complications than
                    is the TAPP. For both the TEP and the TAPP, the patient is placed in the supine position with both arms tucked. Some
                    surgeons insert a Foley, but many do not. A small incision is made at the umbilicus. For a TEP, this incision only goes to
                    the preperitoneal space, and a balloon is then used for dissection. Two additional ports are placed in the midline—one
                    suprapubic and one halfway between the umbilicus and the suprapubic port. Further dissection is required to identify
                    the hernia defects, which are then reduced. The cord structures are completely freed, and any cord lipomas are dissect-
                    ed. Mesh is placed to cover the entire area and is tacked to Cooper’s ligament. For a TAPP repair, the umbilical incision
                   extends into the abdomen. Two additional ports are placed at the level of the iliac crest—one in the RLQ and one in the
                   LLQ. A peritoneal flap over the hernia defect is created, and the preperitoneal space is entered. The rest of the dissection
                   and the placement of the mesh are the same as with the TEP repair. At the end of the TAPP procedure, the peritoneal
                   flap is placed over the mesh and tacked into place to prevent exposure of the bowel to the mesh.

                                                                                                                                                           General Surgery

                               Figure 7.7-9. The inguinal region. (Reproduced with permission from Wind GG: The
                               inguinal region. In: Applied Laparoscopic Anatomy: Abdomen and Pelvis.Williams &
                               Wilkins, Baltimore: 1997.)

===== PAGE 610 =====
610   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                Variant Procedure or approaches: Open hernia repair (see Inguinal Herniorrhaphy, p. 651).
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Inguinal hernia

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine, arms tucked

                                 Incision                3 ports—1 at the umbilicus; 2 either in the midline or RLQ or LLQ, depending on the laparo-
                                                         scopic approach.

                                 Special                  Balloon dissector for TEP repair
                                   instrumentation

                                 Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop

                                 Surgical time            1–2 h

                                 Closing                  Minimal time; muscle relaxation may be helpful.
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                      < 50 mL

                                 Postop care              1–2 h in PACU/holding area → home

                                 Mortality                < 0.1%

                                 Morbidity                2%
                                                          Orchialgia, neuralgia
        General Surgery

                                                          Recurrence of hernia: significant learning curve
                                                          Bowel obstruction
                                                          Bladder injury: rarely reported

                                 Pain score               3–4

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Mostly adults

                                 Male:Female             Male > Female

                                 Incidence               Common

                                 Etiology                Most hernias congenital; chronically increased intraabdominal pressure (e.g., chronic cough, obesity)

                                 Associated              None important
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                The preop evaluation of patients undergoing laparoscopic hernia repair is discussed in Anesthetic Considerations for
                                Inguinal Hernia, p. 652. Patients presenting for this procedure are generally healthy. Laparoscopic repair of inguinal
                                hernia is usually associated with less pain and earlier return to preop function when compared to the open proce-
                                dure. Patients with strangulated or incarcerated hernias usually require emergent open procedures.

                                Cardiovascular            Cardiovascular changes caused by the pneumoperitoneum include ↓ venous return →
                                                          ↓ CO and ↑ SVR. Decreased blood flow to the splanchnic and renal circulations (→ ↓ UO)
                                                          may result from high intraabdominal pressures.

                                Laboratory                Hb/Hct (healthy patients); otherwise, as indicated from H&P.

                                Premedication             Standard premedication (p. B-2)

===== PAGE 611 =====
Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery            611

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA

                     Induction                   Standard induction (p. B-2). OG/NG tube prior to incision to decompress the stomach.

                     Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (p. B-2)

                     Emergence                   No special considerations except to minimize coughing on emergence. Consider 1 mg/
                                                 kg iv lidocaine.

                     Blood and fluid             IV: 18 ga × 1                                Blood loss should be minimal.
                        requirements             NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h

                     Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)                   Others as indicated by patient status.
                                                 Urinary catheter                             Prevent hypothermia (forced-air warmer, heated and
                                                                                              humidified gases, warming blanket, warm OR, etc.).

                     Positioning                 ✓ and pad pressure points                    Careful positioning and padding of the patient is
                                                 ✓ eyes                                       essential.

                     Complications               Hemorrhage from trocar insertion.            These complications (associated with the preperito-
                                                 Subcutaneous emphysema                       neal approach), as well as the general complications
                                                                                              of laparoscopy, are discussed in Anesthetic Consid-
                                                                                              erations for Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, p. 591.

                                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               PONV                                         See Appendix B
                                                Urinary retention                            Straight catheterization of the bladder

                    Pain                        Oral opiates                                 Tylenol #3 – 2 po q 6 h or Percocet – 2 po q 6 h.
                      management                Ketorolac                                    15–30 mg iv

                    Tests                       As indicated by patient status.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Crawford DL, Philips EH: Totally extraperitoneal laparoscopic herniorrhaphy. In: Zucker KA, ed. Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 571–84.
                     2. Matthews RD, Anthony T, Kim LT, et al: Factors associated with postoperative complications and hernia recurrence for patients
                        undergoing inguinal hernia repair: a report from the VA Cooperative Hernia Study Group. Am J Surg 2007; 194(5):611–7.
                     3. Neumayer L, Giobbie-Hurder A, Jonasson O, et al: Open mesh versus laparoscopic mesh repair of inguinal hernia. N Engl
                        J Med 2004; 350(18):1819–27.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC BARIATRIC SURGERY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                    Description: Morbid obesity is increasing worldwide. Currently, nearly two-thirds of Americans are overweight (BMI
                    25–30 kg/m2) or obese (BMI > 30 kg/m2). According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and P  revention,
                   35% of American adults are obese. Many patients have associated comorbidities, including HTN, d    iabetes, and sleep
                   apnea, which they have been unable to correct by dieting and exercise. In 1998, the NIH recommended bariatric
                   surgery as the primary treatment for morbid obesity. Surgical treatment results in weight loss of approximately
                   2/3–3/4 of excess body weight, usually with consequent correction of comorbidities. Operations for morbid obesity
                   are classified as restrictive, such as the adjustable gastric banding and vertical banded g
                                                                                                              astroplasty; malabsorp-
                   tive, such as a jejunoileal bypass; or a combination, such as the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. The 1991 NIH consensus

===== PAGE 612 =====
General Surgery   612   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                          Figure 7.7-10. Patient position and trocar position for bariatric laparoscopic surgery.
                                          (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Connors CEH, Dawson, DL: Operative
                                          Anatomy, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                statement identified the Roux-en-Y bypass as the best surgical treatment for morbid obesity. In general, this operation
                                is approached laparoscopically in most patients because of the decreased pain, earlier ambulation, earlier discharge
                                from the hospital, quicker return to regular activity, and decreased wound complication rates, when compared with
                                an open approach. Open approaches, though very rare, are undertaken in patients with previous upper abdominal
                                surgery; patients who may not tolerate an increased intraabdominal pressure (e.g., CHF, severe CAD, severe pul-
                                monary disease), patients undergoing revision bariatric surgery, and occasionally in patients who fall into a super
                                morbidly obese group (BMI > 60 kg/m2 ). Surgery is indicated in patients with a BMI of 35–40 kg/m2, if they have
                                associated comorbidities, or > 40 kg/m2, if they have no associated comorbidities.
                                In these procedures, the patient generally is placed in Reverse Trendelenberg-Head Elevated Laryngoscopic Posi-
                                tion (RT-HELP). Some surgeons prefer a split-leg table, with the surgeon standing between the legs. For a laparo-
                                scopic Roux-en-Y bypass, the first incision is made in the midline, approximately halfway between the u        mbilicus
                                and the xyphoid; 4–5 additional ports are then placed in the LUQ and the midline (Fig. 7.7-10). Most surgeons
                                begin by performing a jejunojejunostomy. During this time, the patient is placed in a reverse Trendelenburg posi-
                                tion to drop the small intestines into the pelvis. The omentum is placed in the upper abdomen, and the ligament of
                                Treitz is identified. The jejunum is divided with an endo GIA stapler ~20 cm from the ligament of Treitz. A Roux
                                limb of 100 cm is then measured. (Occasionally, this Roux limb may be 150 cm, if the patient’s BMI is > 50 kg/m2.)
                                The jejunojejunostomy is created with a stapler, and the enterotomy is closed. Some surgeons prefer a retrocolic
                                approach, wherein a passage is made through the transverse mesocolon. Other surgeons prefer an antecolic ap-
                                proach, in which the omentum is divided to allow for a place where the Roux limb can pass without tension. At
                                this point, the liver retractor is placed, and the gastric pouch is created. Before stomach stapling, everything in the
                                stomach, OG tubes, and calibrating tubes, should be removed. The gastric pouch is then stapled and cut. Often a
                                calibrating tube is placed after the first two staple firings to help maintain the size of the pouch and the anastomo-
                                sis. Some surgeons hand sew the gastrojejunostomy, and some staple it with a linear stapler. Some surgeons staple
                                the anastomosis and place the anvil of the end-to-end anastomotic stapler through the mouth (rarely done). Other
                                surgeons place the anvil through a separate gastrotomy prior to complete division of the pouch. At the end, the
                                gastrojejunostomy typically is tested by inflating air into the gastric pouch, either through an OG tube, the sizing

===== PAGE 613 =====
Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery       613

                   tube, or a gastroscope. Generally, the NG or OG tube is removed at the end of the procedure. Often, at this point,
                   surgeons will close the defect of the transverse mesocolon.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Open bypass (see p. 511).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Morbid obesity generally in combination with a medical condition(s) felt to be worsened by
                   the obesity (e.g., osteoarthritis, diabetes, respiratory insufficiency, CHF, hypertension, sleep apnea); BMI > 40 kg/m2, or
                   BMI > 35 kg/m2 if associated comorbidities present.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine or split leg (see Fig. 7.2-6 in Open Operations for Morbid Obesity, p. 511 for suggested
                                             positioning.)

                     Incision                Five to six port sites

                     Unique                  Patients are at high risk for aspiration, and airway management may be difficult.
                       considerations        Patients are at high risk for thromboembolic events and VTE prophylaxis is critical (p. B-2).

                     Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 2 g iv

                     Surgical time           2–4 h

                     Closing                 Typically, fascial defects are not closed.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     < 50 mL

                     Postop care

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                                             Most patients receive an upper GI study the next day. Clear liquids are begun if the study is nor-
                                             mal, and most patients are discharged within 48 h.

                     Mortality               < 1%

                     Morbidity               Overall: 10%
                                             Stricture: 10%
                                             Leak: 1–2%
                                             VTE
                                             Pneumonia
                                             Hemorrhage
                                             Hernia
                                             Obstruction
                                             Infection

                     Pain score              5–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age Range               Generally, between 18–60 yr

                     Male:Female             Female > Male

                     Incidence               5%

                     Etiology                Genetic; environmental

                     Associated              Sleep apnea; HTN; diabetes; GERD, osteoarthritis
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         Preoperative
                   Obesity is associated with many chronic medical problems. Morbidity and mortality rise sharply with increasing age
                   and BMI. Obesity and length of exposure to obesity, increase the risk of hospital admission and lengthen hospital
                   stay. Medical comorbidities must be optimized before e lective bariatric surgery. Evaluate any patient who has had
                   previous bariatric surgery for metabolic changes that can i nclude protein, vitamin, iron, and calcium deficiencies.

===== PAGE 614 =====
614   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                Review a list of all current medications the patient is taking, including nonprescription appetite suppressors and
                                diet drugs. Many of these drugs can have important side effects. For example, the combination of phentermine and
                                fenfluramine (“phen-fen”), which is no longer prescribed in the United States, is associated with persistent, serious,
                                heart and lung problems. Another weight loss medication, sibutramine, works in the brain by inhibiting the reuptake
                                of norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, producing a feeling of “anorexia,” which limits food intake. Sibutramine
                                has been implicated as a cause of dysrhythmias and hypertension. Orlistat blocks digestion and absorption of dietary
                                fat by binding lipases in the gastrointestinal tract and can cause deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K). A
                                reduction in vitamin K levels can increase the anticoagulation effects of warfarin.

                                Respiratory                Adipose tissue is metabolically active. Oxygen consumption and CO2 production rise with
                                                          increasing weight 2° ↑ metabolic demands. The work of breathing is increased, while respi-
                                                          ratory muscle performance is impaired. Mass loading of the thoracic and abdominal walls
                                                          causes abnormalities in both lung volume and gas exchange, especially when the patient
                                                          is supine. The increased total respiratory resistance and decreased compliance associated
                                                          with extreme obesity result in shallow, rapid breathing. Decreased FRC 2º ↓ ERV → ↓ TLC.
                                                          Airways close during normal ventilation → ↑ pulmonary shunt → hypoxemia. These
                                                          changes increase in direct proportion with increasing BMI. General anesthesia and the
                                                          supine position further reduce FRC.
                                                          Preop PFTs show a restrictive breathing pattern. For symptomatic patients, an ABG o    btained
                                                          while the patient breathes room air is useful to establish a baseline. Younger obese patients
                                                          have an increased ventilatory response to hypoxia and a relatively decreased response to
                                                          hypercapnia. Their arterial blood sample often demonstrates alveolar hyperventilation
                                                          (PaCO2 30–35 mm Hg) and relative hypoxemia (PaO2 70–90 mm Hg) while breathing air.
        General Surgery

                                                            With increasing age, sensitivity to CO2 decreases, so that PaCO2 rises and PaO2 falls further.
                                                           Preop assessment of a patient’s face, neck, and upper airway is required because mask
                                                           ventilation and tracheal intubation can be a challenge in some obese patients. A large neck
                                                           circumference and high Mallampati score may predict difficult intubation. A review of
                                                           the patient’s previous anesthetic records will reveal whether airway problems had been
                                                           encountered during previous surgical procedures. Thorough preparation requires that
                                                           multiple laryngoscopy blades and sizes, a gum elastic bougie, and laryngeal mask airway
                                                           are readily available prior to laryngoscopy. Video laryngoscopes and fiberoptic intubation
                                                           are increasingly used for known or anticipated problematic laryngoscopy.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular            Cardiac output rises proportionally with increased weight. Lean body weight, which
                                                          increases with increasing obesity, is significantly related to cardiac output. ↑ CO and
                                                          normal PVR → ↑ BP. Mild to moderate hypertension is seen in most morbidly obese pa-
                                                          tients. The increased left ventricular wall stress caused by increased stroke volume and the
                                                           resultant ventricular dilation leads to cardiac hypertrophy. Left ventricular dysfunction is
                                                          often present in young, asymptomatic patients. Even normotensive patients have increased
                                                          preload and afterload, ↑ PAP (which may be exacerbated with hypercarbia and hypoxia)
                                                          and elevated right and left ventricular stroke work. Because these patients are often not
                                                          physically active, they may appear to be asymptomatic even in the presence of significant
                                                          cardiovascular disease. Signs of pulmonary HTN (exertional dyspnea, fatigue, syncope)
                                                          should be sought and TEE obtained in symptomatic patients. RV failure is common in
                                                          older patients. A medical consultation with a cardiologist may be indicated before bariatric
                                                          surgery. The ECG may show increased rate, changes in QRS voltage, left QRS axis shift,
                                                          slowed conduction, and evidence of ischemia or previous myocardial infarction. Polycy-
                                                          themia suggests chronic hypoxemia.
                                                          Tests: ECG and others as indicated from H&P

                                Obstructive               Many obese patients maintain a normal PaCO2 during the day, but have CO2 retention,
                                  sleep apnea             sleep disturbances, intermittent airway obstruction with hypoxemia, pulmonary hyperten-
                                  (OSA)                   sion, and cardiac dysrhythmias at night. OSA syndrome is characterized by frequent epi-
                                  syndrome                sodes of apnea (> 10 sec cessation of airflow, despite continuous respiratory effort against
                                                          a closed airway) and hypopnea (50% reduction in airflow or reduction associated with a
                                                          decrease of SpO2 > 4%). OSA is frequently undiagnosed in patients scheduled for bariatric
                                                          surgery. OSA occurs more often in patients with large necks and high Mallampati (III and

===== PAGE 615 =====
Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery        615

                    Obstructive         IV) scores. The patient may not be aware of symptoms, so it is important to interview the
                      sleep apnea       patient’s sleeping partner. If OSA is present, the partner will describe loud snoring fol-
                      (OSA)             lowed by silence as airflow ceases with obstruction, then gasping or choking as the patient
                      syndrome          awakes and airflow restarts. The STOP-BANG questionnaire is a useful screening tool for
                      (cont’d)          OSA. A recent study found that a STOP-BANG score of 5–8 identified patients with a high
                                        probability of moderate/severe OSA. However, a definitive diagnosis of OSA can only be
                                        confirmed by polysomnography. Because of fragmented sleep patterns, OSA patients may
                                        complain of daytime sleepiness and headaches. Chronic sleep apnea leads to secondary
                                        polycythemia, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia, all of which increase the risk of cardiac and
                                        cerebral vascular disease. Patients with a history of snoring or OSA are often difficult to
                                        ventilate by mask, and their tracheas may be more difficult to intubate than those of simi-
                                        lar weight patients without OSA. OSA patients who use CPAP devices at home should
                                        be instructed to bring them to the hospital to use following surgery. A patient known or
                                        even suspected of having OSA should be continuously monitored by pulse oximetry in the
                                        postop period, even following a completely uneventful operation. Patients are at highest
                                        risk for hypoxic respiratory failure 72 h after tracheal extubation.

                    Obesity             A small number of patients have obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS), characterized
                      hypoventilation   by somnolence, cardiac enlargement, polycythemia, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia. OHS
                      syndrome          patients tend to be older, super obese (BMI > 50 kg/m2), and have more restricted pulmo-
                                        nary function than other patients with OSA. Hypoventilation that is central and indepen-
                                        dent of intrinsic lung disease is probably caused by the respiratory center’s progressive
                                        desensitization to hypercapnia from nocturnal sleep disturbances. In the most severe

                                                                                                                                                  General Surgery
                                        form of OHS, the “Pickwickian Syndrome,” hypersomnolence, hypoxia, h         ypercapnia,
                                        pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular enlargement, and hypervolemia occur. These
                                        patients rely on a hypoxic ventilatory drive and may hypoventilate or even b   ecome ap-
                                        neic following emergence from general anesthesia after being given 100% O2 to breathe.

                    Gastrointestinal    It is widely believed that morbidly obese patients are at greater risk for acid aspiration dur-
                                        ing induction of general anesthesia. Recently this belief has been challenged. One study
                                        reported that fasting obese patients actually had a lower incidence of high-volume, low-
                                        pH gastric fluid than lean patients, whereas another found no differences in gastric vol-
                                        ume or pH between lean and moderately obese surgical patients. Obese patients without
                                        GERD symptoms have relatively normal gastroesophageal sphincter tone. Obese patients
                                        at special risk for gastric acid aspiration may be those with diabetes and gastroparesis.
                                        Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH, “fatty hepatitis”), with or without liver dysfunction,
                                        is extremely common. Histologic abnormalities are present in the livers of as many as 90%
                                        of morbidly obese patients. Preop liver function tests should be obtained, but they often do
                                        not reflect the actual severity of liver dysfunction. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is the
                                        most frequently elevated liver enzyme. Hepatic metabolism of many anesthetic agents is
                                        usually not clinically altered with NASH.

                    Renal               There is ↑ RBF and ↑ GFR associated with obesity. Renal clearance of drugs may be greater
                                        than in the normal weight patient. The most common renal abnormality seen is proteinuria.
                                        Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Premedication       Sedative drugs should be avoided. For the very anxious patient small amounts of midazol-
                                        am (1–2 mg, iv) can be given. If a fiberoptic airway intubation is planned, atropine or gly-
                                        copyrrolate will decrease oral secretions. Most medications for chronic HTN are contin-
                                        ued before surgery. An exception are the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
                                        and angiotensen II receptor blocker (ARB) classes of antihypertensives, which should be
                                        stopped preop because they can cause ↓↓ BP following induction of anesthesia. Diabetic
                                        medications (insulin, oral hypoglycemics) are usually withheld on the morning of surgery,
                                        but blood sugar levels must be closely monitored in the perioperative period. Antibiotics
                                        and heparin (VTE prophylaxis) are usually administered before surgery at the surgeon’s
                                        request. For protection against acid aspiration an H2-receptor antagonist can be given the
                                        night before and again on the morning of surgery.

===== PAGE 616 =====
616   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     Intraoperative
                                Anesthetic technique: Despite conflicting evidence that morbidly obese patients are at greater risk for acid aspiration,
                                it remains prudent to establish a secure airway as quickly and safely as possible. Patients cannot tolerate the supine
                                position and should be preoxygenated in the reverse Trendelenburg position (RTP) until SPO2 is 100% for several min.
                                With apneic patients expect rapid desaturation because FRC is reduced and O2 reserves are limited. Preoxygenation in
                                RTP can increase O2 reserves, but may cause pooling of blood and → ↓ BP. The increase in adipose tissue seen in obese
                                subjects increases volume of distribution of lipophilic anesthetic agents. However, drug distribution is dependent on
                                cardiac output, which is strongly related to lean body mass. Administration of intravenous induction agents and opioids
                                should be based on lean body weight (LBW) to avoid drug overdose.
                                Tracheal intubation is necessary for controlled ventilation and airway protection. High Mallampati score and large neck
                                circumference are the most reliable predictors of potential intubation difficulties. If a problem is anticipated preop, an
                                “awake intubation” with a fiberoptic bronchoscope is recommended. Appropriate nerve blocks and topical anesthesia to
                                the airway are applied, and sedative drugs are kept to a minimum. It is important that the patient breathes supplemental
                                O2 during the intubation procedure. Successful direct laryngoscopy requires proper patient position. The patient must
                                be placed with the head, upper body and shoulders significantly elevated (“stacked” or “ramped”) so that the ear is level
                                with the sternum (head elevated laryngoscopy position, H.E.L.P.; see Fig. 7.2-6). When a morbidly obese patient is in
                                this position, the endoscopist’s view during direct laryngoscopy is significantly improved.

                                Induction                  For most patients a rapid sequence induction with propofol (2–2.5 mg/kg LBW) and
                                                           succinylcholine (1 mg/kg TBW), combined with cricoid pressure (~10 lb), is the best
                                                            means for securing the airway. Bag and mask ventilation is often difficult 2º upper a irway
                                                           obstruction and ↓ pulmonary compliance. Gastric insufflation during ineffective mask
        General Surgery

                                                           ventilation will further increase the risk of regurgitation and acid aspiration. A 2nd person
                                                           experienced with airway management, preferably another anesthesiologist, must always be
                                                           present to assist when difficulty is anticipated.
                                                           Aids for difficult intubation, including a short laryngoscope handle, a variety of laryn-
                                                           goscope blades, special laryngoscopy equipment (Glidescope™, Airtraq™), a gum elastic
                                                            bougie, and equipment for cricothyroidotomy and transtracheal jet ventilation should be
                                                            available. A Pro-Seal LMA or intubating LMA can serve as a “bridge” until an endotracheal
                                                            tube is placed when difficulty is encountered.

                                Maintenance                   Patients should be ventilated with an FiO2 of 0.5–1.0 and a tidal volume 10–12 mL/kg
                                                            IBW, preferably in the RTP. Larger tidal volumes will only marginally improve oxygenation,
                                                            while producing hypocapnia and potentially causing lung trauma. PEEP superimposed
                                                            on a large tidal volume can actually worsen hypoxemia by ↓ CO, which in turn will ↓ O2
                                                              delivery. Placement of subdiaphragmatic packs or retractors or changing to lithotomy or
                                                              Trendelenburg positions will also impair ventilation.
                                                              The patient is ventilated with an inhalational anesthetic (isoflurane, sevoflurane or des-
                                                              flurane) with a FiO2 of 50–100% O2. All inhalational anesthetics, including isoflurane,
                                                             are rapidly eliminated. With appropriate timing there are no clinical differences in the
                                                             recovery time after general anesthesia with any inhalational anesthetic agent. N2O can be
                                                            used b  ecause it does not dilate the bowel during laparoscopic bariatric surgery, but its role
                                                            is limited due to the high oxygen demand of many patients. For analgesia, incremental
                                                           boluses of fentanyl or a remifentanil infusion are commonly used. Fentanyl infusions have
                                                            also been used successfully in this patient population. D  exmedetomidine may be used as
                                                            a supplemental infusion as it may minimize opioid requirements. Morphine and dilaudid,
                                                            which have prolonged onset and duration of action, should be avoided.
                                                            The anesthesiologist is usually responsible for proper placement of the gastric tube
                                                            to decompress the stomach and to help size the gastric pouch. The anesthesiolo-
                                                            gist may be asked to help perform leak tests for anastomotic integrity, either by insuf-
                                                            flation of the gastric tube or placement of saline or dye down the tube. It is extremely
                                                            important that the gastric tube be completely withdrawn before the gastric pouch
                                                            is stapled. Esophageal or nasopharyngeal temperature probes are not recommend-
                                                            ed as they may be inadvertently stapled if not completely withdrawn. Heat loss may
                                                            be exaggerated by the CO2 pneumoperitoneum and by cold irrigating fluids. Warm-
                                                             ing blankets and other devices should be employed intraop, and warmed iv and
                                                            irrigating fluids are occasionally needed if there is a significant drop in temperature.

===== PAGE 617 =====
Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery         617

                    Maintenance        Loss of pneumoperitoneum may indicate incomplete paralysis. Because nondepolarizing
                      (cont’d)         muscle relaxants are hydrophilic, there is limited distribution to adipose tissue and no clin-
                                       ical advantage between any of the commonly used agents. Neuromuscular recovery time
                                       is similar in obese and nonobese patients with atracurium, vecuronium or rocuronium.
                                       Relaxants should be administered in incremental doses based on IBW, and neuromuscular
                                       blockade must be completely reversed before extubation of the trachea.

                    Emergence          The inhalation agent is discontinued several min before surgery is completed. Once the
                                       patient is spontaneously ventilating, fentanyl may be titrated according to respiratory rate.
                                       If a remifentanil infusion is being used, it should be turned off just prior to extubation
                                       to allow spontaneous ventilation. The patient should be extubated when fully awake. In
                                       most cases, a nasal trumpet may be inserted to minimize upper airway obstruction after
                                       extubation. If hemodynamically stable, the patient’s airway should be extubated with the
                                       upper body elevated 30–45º. Then, the patient should be transferred from the OR in that
                                       position. Postop admission to an ICU and/or mechanical ventilation is rarely needed. Fac-
                                       tors that may necessitate ventilatory support include extremes of age, super obesity, co-
                                       existing cardiac disease or pulmonary disease and CO2 retention, fever or infection, and
                                       an uncooperative or extremely anxious patient. The need for postop admission to an ICU
                                       is relatively common after open bariatric procedures, but rare after laparoscopic surgery.

                    Blood and Fluid    IV: 16–18 × 1                           Intraop fluid requirements are usually greater than
                       Requirements    NS/LR @ 8–12 mL/kg/h                    would be anticipated in a normal weight patient.
                                       Fluid warmer                            Several liters of crystalloid should be given during
                                                                               a laparoscopic bariatric operation. It is essential

                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                                                                               that adequate amounts of iv fluid be given to reduce
                                                                               postop renal failure and to avoid other rare but
                                                                               serious complications such as rhabdomyolysis.

                    Monitoring         ± CVP Standard monitors (p. B-1)        Noninvasive cuff pressure may be inaccurate if the
                                                                               anatomy of the upper arm doesn’t allow a proper fit.
                                                                               Cuff pressures can be obtained from the forearm or
                                                                               ankle. Because venous access is often limited, a cen-
                                                                               tral line can be helpful for postop needs. Note that
                                                                               the length of a standard iv catheter placed percuta-
                                                                               neously in the neck of a very large patient may not
                                                                               be long enough to reach an intrathoracic location.

                    Positioning        RTP                                     In the supine position FRC is ↓↓ → V/Q mismatch
                                       ✓ and pad pressure points               + ↑ O2 consumption, ↑ CO, and ↑ PAP. A left lateral
                                       ✓ eyes                                  tilt will prevent inferior vena cava compression in the
                                       SCD’s                                   supine patient. The Trendelenburg and lithotomy po-
                                                                               sitions further decrease lung volumes. If possible, the
                                                                               patient should always be in the reverse Trendelenburg
                                                                               position (RTP) during surgery because in this position
                                                                               the diaphragm is “unloaded” and FRC is maximized.

                    CO2 Pneumoper-     ↑ PIP + ↓ TV                            The physiologic effects of the CO2 pneumoperito-
                      itoneum          ↑ ETCO2 + PaCO2                         neum are usually well tolerated by the patient and
                                       ↑ HR + ↑ MAP                            require no intervention. Maintaining the patient
                                                                               in the RTP minimizes the restriction of respiratory
                                                                               mechanics from the CO2 insufflation. All changes
                                                                               return to normal once the pneumoperitoneum is
                                                                               relieved. However, complications can occur.

                    Complications      Hypoxemia                               The pneumoperitoneum can displace the diaphragm
                                       Massive gas embolism                    cephalad, causing the position of the endotracheal
                                       Pneumothorax                            tube to change. Occasionally the endotracheal tube’s
                                       Pneumomediastinum                       tip can enter a bronchus, so always consider tube
                                                                               displacement in the differential diagnosis of hypox-
                                                                               emia during laparoscopy.

===== PAGE 618 =====
618   c h a p t e r 7.7     Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                     Postoperative

                                Position and                 Semirecumbent and RTP                        Maximize oxygenation by allowing the diaphragm
                                  Oxygenation                                                             to fall and FRC to increase. Patients can become
                                                                                                          hypoxemic if supplemental O2 is withheld in the
                                                                                                          immediate recovery period. Restoration of normal
                                                                                                          pulmonary function after open abdominal surgery
                                                                                                          may take several days.
                                                             CPAP/BiPAP                                   In theory, CPAP could distend the gastric pouch,
                                                                                                          but its use following bariatric surgery has not been
                                                                                                          associated with anastomotic leaks. Patients who
                                                                                                          use nocturnal CPAP/BiPAP should be encouraged
                                                                                                          to bring their equipment the day of surgery for use
                                                                                                          during the postoperative period.

                                Complications                Venous thromboembolism                       VTE prophylaxis should always be considered in
                                                                                                          the postop period, even for patients with epidural
                                                                                                          catheters. A vena cava umbrella is occasionally
                                                                                                          placed preop in older and high-risk patients. Early
                                                                                                          ambulation must be encouraged.
                                                             PONV                                         Multimodal intraop prophylaxis with several anti-
                                                                                                          emetic agents will reduce but not eliminate PONV.
                                                                                                          Dexamethasone (4–8 mg) should be part of the
        General Surgery

                                                                                                          therapeutic regimen (see p. B-2).

                                Pain                         PCA                                          PCA with opioid dose based on LBW is usually sat-
                                  Management                                                              isfactory. Avoid large amounts of opioids, which can
                                                                                                          depress ventilation. The use of nonopioid analgesic
                                                                                                          adjuncts should be instituted early. Dexmedetomi-
                                                                                                          dine, which has no respiratory depressant effects, is a
                                                                                                          useful alternative or supplement to opioids. Nonste-
                                                                                                          roidal anti-inflammatory drugs are helpful initially,
                                                                                                          but should be discontinued within a day or two to
                                                                                                          avoid the potential complication of gastric ulceration.

                                Tests                        As indicated by patient status

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Altermatt FR, Munoz HR, Delfino AE, et al: Pre-oxygenation in the obese patient: effects of position on tolerance to apnoea.
                                     Br J Anaesth 2005; 95:706–9.
                                  2. Arain SR, Barth CD, Shankar H, et al: Choice of volatile anesthetic for the morbidly obese patient: sevoflurane or desflurane.
                                     J Clin Anesth 2005; 17:413–9.
                                  3. Brodsky JB: Positioning the morbidly obese patient for anesthesia. Obes Surg 2002; 12:751–8.
                                  4. Brodsky JB, Lemmens HJM, Collins JS, et al: Nitrous oxide and laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Obes Surg 2005; 15:494–6.
                                  5. Frappier J, Guenoun T, Journois D, et al: Airway management using the intubating laryngeal mask airway for the morbidly
                                     obese patient. Anesth Analg 2003; 96:1510–5.
                                  6. Helling TS, Willoughby TL, Maxfield DM, et al: Determinants of the need for intensive care and prolonged mechanical
                                     ventilation in patients undergoing bariatric surgery. Obes Surg 2004; 14:1036–41.
                                  7. Holte K, Klarskov B, Christensen DS, et al: Liberal versus restrictive fluid administration to improve recovery after laparoscopic
                                     cholecystectomy. A randomized, double-blind study. Ann Surg 2004; 240:892–9.
                                  8. Huerta S, DeShields S, Shpiner R, et al: Safety and efficacy of postoperative continuous positive airway pressure to prevent
                                     pulmonary complications after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. J Gastrointest Surg 2002; 6:354–8.
                                  9. Ingrande J, Lemmens HJM: Dose adjustments of anaesthetics in the morbidly obese. Br J Anaesth 2012; 105 (Suppl 1):16–23.
                                 10. Juvin P, Vadam C, Malek L, et al: Postoperative recovery after desflurane, propofol, or isoflurane anesthesia among morbidly
                                     obese patients: a prospective, randomized study. Anesth Analg 2000; 91:714–9.
                                 11. Lemmens HJM, Brodsky JB: The dose of succinylcholine in morbid obesity. Anesth Analg 2006; 102:438–42.
                                 12. McCarty TM, Arnold DT, Lamont JP, et al: Optimizing outcomes in bariatric surgery. Outpatient laparoscopic gastric bypass.
                                     Ann Surg 2005; 242:494–501.
                                 13. Nguyen NT, Wolfe BM: The physiologic effects of pneumoperitoneum in the morbidly obese. Ann Surg 2005; 241:219–26.
                                 14. Ogunnaike BO, Jones SB, Jones DB, et al: Anesthetic considerations for bariatric surgery. Anesth Analg 2002; 95:1793–805.
                                 15. Perilli V, Sollazzi L, Bozza P, et al: The effects of the reverse Trendelenburg position on respiratory mechanics and blood gases
                                     in morbidly obese patients during bariatric surgery. Anesth Analg 2000; 91:1520–5.

===== PAGE 619 =====
Anesthesia for Laparoscopy in Pregnancy            619

                   ANESTHESIA FOR LAPAROSCOPY IN PREGNANCY
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Approximately 0.75–2% of pregnant woman require nonobstetric surgery, accounting for more than 80,000 anes-
                   thetics for non-obstetric surgery per year, and 10–20% of those will require intraabdominal surgery (diagnostic
                   or therapeutic), most commonly for appendectomy, cholecystectomy, trauma or gynecological indications. If
                   surgery cannot be avoided, it is best carried out in the 2nd trimester. Warn p    atients about possible fetal loss
                   (3–12% in 1st trimester) and premature labor (5–8% in 2nd and 25–40% in 3rd trimesters). Anesthesia and sur-
                   gery are associated with increased spontaneous abortion, growth retardation, and perinatal mortality; however,
                   no increase in congenital abnormalities has been found. Rates of fetal loss, premature labor, and maternal mor-
                   tality are higher among sicker patients. It is unclear whether adverse outcomes after surgery relate to the disease
                   process itself, disturbances in nutrition, the surgical procedure, exposure to radiation, or drugs. No correlation
                   has been found between outcome and any specific anesthetic technique or agent (including N2O).
                   Laparoscopy is the procedure of choice for many surgeries in nonpregnant patients. Historically, its use in pregnancy
                   was controversial, although significant experience now supports its safety and efficacy. Advantages of laparoscopy in-
                   clude more rapid recovery, shorter hospital stays, less postop narcotic use (→ ↓ fetal depression), lower risk of wound
                   infection, less postoperative ileus, and better cosmesis. No differences in fetal outcome or incidence of preterm labor
                   have been found when compared to open procedures. However, regardless of the method of abdominal access, the

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                   laparoscopic or open appendectomy and cholecystectomy population is at high risk (37–41%) for perinatal complica-
                   tions. Risks of laparoscopy include difficult surgical access and potential uterine injury with Veress needles or trocars.
                   Current recommendations suggest either an open technique (e.g., Hasson cannula) or Veress needle/optical trocar
                   are appropriate for obtaining laparoscope access with adjustments for fundal height.

                   Note that acute appendicitis and cholecystitis often present with advanced or complicated disease because of dif-
                   ficulty diagnosing the “acute abdomen” and a reluctance to use radiation-based diagnostic tests in pregnancy.

                    Respiratory               Pregnant patients have ↑ MV with respiratory alkalosis (PaCO2 = 32–34 mm Hg) and are sub-
                                              ject to the rapid onset of hypoxemia if ventilation is compromised due to alterations in lung
                                              and metabolic functions, including a 20% ↓ in FRC and a 20% ↑ in O2 consumption. Avoid
                                              hyperventilation (PaCO2 < 30) which causes decreased uterine artery blood flow. U   ptake of
                                              and sensitivity to inhalational anesthetics is enhanced (↓ FRC, ↓ MAC, and hyperventila-
                                              tion). During laparoscopy, peritoneal insufflation and head-down positioning may further
                                              compromise lung function (↓ FRC and ↓ lung compliance). Mucosal capillary engorgement
                                              in upper airways may necessitate a smaller ETT and mandates careful airway suctioning to
                                              avoid bleeding. Airway management is more difficult in this patient population.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular            Pregnancy → ↑ CO, ↓ MAP, ↑ HR, ↑ blood volume, and ↓ oncotic pressure → ↑ risk of pul-
                                              monary edema. Supine hypotensive syndrome: To minimize aortocaval compression and
                                              → ↓ ↓ BP (> 20 wk gestation), the supine position should be modified by the use of a left
                                              lateral pelvic tilt to displace the uterus. Moderate abdominal insufflation pressures (8–12
                                              mm Hg) should be used to minimize further caval compression and ↓ uterine blood flow.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic               WBC count is elevated during pregnancy (8000–12,000/mm) and may delay diagnosis of
                                              concurrent infections (e.g., appendicitis). Iron deficiency anemia often is superimposed on
                                              the dilutional anemia of pregnancy (Hct 33%). Pregnant patients are hypercoagulable, and
                                              antiembolic compression devices should be used.
                                              Tests: Hb/Hct. T&S if significant blood loss is anticipated. Coag studies and Plt count if + PIH.

                    Gastrointestinal          Emergency surgery, ↓ gastric motility, ↑ GERD, ↑ intragastric pressure, ↓ lower esophageal
                                              sphincter tone, and gastric hyperacidity → ↑ risk of aspiration pneumonitis. All pregnant
                                              patients (> 16–20 wk) should be considered to have full stomachs and should receive a
                                              nonparticulate antacid (e.g., 0.3 M Na citrate 30 mL) immediately before GA, as well as iv
                                              metoclopramide 10 mg and ranitidine 50 mg 30–60 min before surgery.

===== PAGE 620 =====
620   c h a p t e r 7.7   Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                Renal                      Pregnancy → ↑ renal blood flow and ↑ creatinine, clearance and ↓ serum creatinine and
                                                           ↓ BUN. Dependent edema results from increased water and sodium retention and ↓
                                                           oncotic pressure.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Laboratory                 Others tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication              Full-stomach precautions (see Gastrointestinal, above); midazolam (1–2 mg) given as
                                                           appropriate to decrease anxiety.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: After 16 wk gestation, anticipate ↑ risks of aspiration and difficult intubation. Plan ahead for
                                management of a potentially difficult airway (see pp. 595–596). GA is the preferred technique because laparoscopy
                                and abdominal surgery are poorly tolerated under regional anesthesia. A lead shield should be used to protect the
                                fetus during fluoroscopy.
                                Fetal Monitoring: The primary obstetric care provider should be notified and a qualified person should be readily
                                available to interpret the fetal heart rate (FHR) and perform cesarean delivery if indicated. If the fetus is considered to
                                be viable (~24 wk gestation), FHR and contraction monitoring should be performed before and after the procedure
                                to confirm fetal well-being and the absence of uterine contractions. If feasible, continuous intraoperative monitoring
                                of FHR during surgery (electronic FNR monitoring, transvaginal Doppler) may be appropriate. Each case requires a
                                team approach and a management plan for evaluation and action if a nonreassuring trace develops. Surgery should
        General Surgery

                                only be done at an institute with adequate facilities and neonatal services.
                                General anesthesia: If difficult intubation is anticipated, an awake fiberoptic intubation (p. B-4) or video laryn-
                                goscopy is recommended. In any event, emergency airway management equipment (e.g., LMA, transtracheal jet
                                ventilator), must be immediately accessible in the OR. Communication with the surgeon and obstetrician regarding
                                maternal and fetal condition is essential.

                                Induction                  Left uterine displacement is best achieved by elevating the right hip with a wedge, towel,
                                                           or equivalent device. Standard rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure (p. B-5) as
                                                           appropriate. To optimize intubation, place patient in maximal “sniff” position and consider
                                                           ramping obese patients (Fig. 7.2-6, p. 513). If tracheal intubation is unsuccessful, follow the
                                                           difficult intubation/ventilation drill (p. B-5). After ETT is secured, pass OG tube and de-
                                                           compress stomach to minimize injury from the Veress needle or trocar.

                                Maintenance                0.8–1% isoflurane or 1.5–2.0% sevoflurane in air/O2 (50%) mixture. Avoid N2O → disten-
                                                           tion of bowel and PONV. Administer an opioid (e.g., fentanyl 50–200 µg iv) and/or mid-
                                                           azolam (1–2 mg) to ↓ volatile requirements and ↓ maternal awareness. Administer muscle
                                                           relaxants (e.g., vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg). Control ventilation, avoiding hypocapnia (PCO2 <
                                                           30 mm Hg) → ↓ uterine blood flow, and hypercapnia (PCO2 > 36 mm Hg) → fetal acidosis.
                                                           Maintain ETCO2 or PaCO2 at 32–36 mm Hg by ↑ MV. Use low insufflation cut-off pressure
                                                           (8–12 mm Hg, not 15 mm Hg as for nonpregnant patient). Maintain adequate placental
                                                           perfusion by keeping maternal blood pressure at preoperative baseline levels. Fluids and
                                                           vasopressors (phenylephrine, ephedrine) should be utilized as indicated.

                                Emergence                  Reverse muscle relaxation with neostigmine 0.05 mg/kg and glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg or
                                                           atropine 0.02 mg/kg. Anticholinergics (glycopyrrolate/atropine) given before neostigmine
                                                            may minimize possible ↑ uterine tone 2° neostigmine. Delay extubation until patient is
                                                            fully awake and muscle strength has returned to normal. O2 by mask and transport in the
                                                            lateral position. Consider metoclopramide (10 mg iv) and/or ondansetron (4 mg iv) PONV
                                                            prevention.

                                Blood and fluid            IV: 16–18 ga × 1                         Laparoscopy is associated with minimal blood loss,
                                   requirements            NS/LR 4–6 ml/kg/h                        however, inadvertent vascular injury may occur.

===== PAGE 621 =====
Anesthesia for Laparoscopy in Pregnancy         621

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. B-1)       Maternal and neonatal outcome good, and severe
                                       ± Arterial line (major surgery)      acidosis absent when maternal ventilation con-
                                                                            trolled by PaCO2 or ETCO2 measurement. Clinical
                                       FHR monitor (see above)              experience indicates no long-term adverse neonatal
                                                                            effects.
                                       Uterine contraction monitor

                    Positioning        ✓ and pad pressure points            Changes in position have marked effects on respi-
                                       ✓ eyes                               ration (↓ compliance, ↑ pressure, hypoxemia) and
                                                                            hemodynamics. Head-up position + GA + perito-
                                                                            neal insufflation → 50% ↓ CO in the nonpregnant
                                                                            patient and even greater decrease in late pregnancy.
                                                                            Position changes should be gradual to minimize
                                                                            adverse effects.
                                       ± Left uterine displacement          If > 20 wk gestation, left uterine displacement to
                                                                            avoid aortocaval compression.

                    CO2 peritoneum:    ↓ ventilation                        Maternal hypoxemia and respiratory acidosis.
                      Maternal
                      effects          ↓ BP                                 ↓ venous return → ↓ BP.
                                       ↑ GI reflux (↑ abdominal pressure)
                                       CO2 absorption                       → ↑ MAP & ↑ SVR.

                    CO2 peritoneum:    ↓ uterine blood flow                 Up to 60% in animal studies → fetal hypoxia.

                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                      Fetal effects    ↑ preterm labor                      2° ↑ abdominal pressure
                                       Fetal acidosis                       2° absorbed CO2
                                       Fetal ↑ HR/↑ BP

                    Complications      Uterine injury
                                       Bowel/organ injury
                                       Venous air embolism                  Dx: ↓ ETCO2, hypoxemia, hypotension. Rx: 100%
                                                                            O2, stop insufflation immediately, volume and pres-
                                                                            sors, attempt CVP air aspiration.
                                       Thromboembolism/PE                   Prevention: Pneumatic compression devices. Rx:
                                                                            Supportive
                                       Pneumothorax                         Dx: ↑ Airway pressure, ↓ breath sounds, and hyper
                                                                            resonance. Rx: 100% O2, stop insufflation, tube
                                                                            thoracostomy.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain               Standard pain management             Avoid NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen) → pulmonary and
                      management       (p. C-2)                             CV fetal effects (closure of ductus venosus). Con-
                                                                            sider intravenous acetaminophen 1000 mg. Pre-
                                                                            emptive or rescue transversus abdominus plane
                                                                            blocks may be appropriate in select patients.

                    Tests              Hct/CBC
                                       Others as indicated by operative
                                       course.

===== PAGE 622 =====
622   c h a p t e r 7.7    Laparoscopic General Surgery

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. ACOG Committee Opinion Number 474, February 2011; Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2011;
                                     117:420–1.
                                  2. Cheek TG, Baird E: Anesthesia for nonobstetric surgery: maternal and fetal considerations. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2009; 52:
                                     535–45.
                                  3. Cohen-Kerem R, Railton C, Oren D, et al: Pregnancy outcome following non-obstetric surgical intervention. Am J Surg 2005;
                                     190:467–73.
                                  4. Corneille M, Gallup T, Bening T, et al: The use of laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy: evaluation and safety and efficacy. Am
                                     J Surg 2010; 200:363–7.
                                  5. Curet MJ: Special problems in laparoscopic surgery. Surg Clin North Am 2000; 80(4):1093–110.
                                  6. Erekson E, Brousseau E, Dick-Biascoechea M, et al: Maternal postoperative complications after nonobstetric antenatal
                                     surgery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2012; 25(12):2639–44.
                                  7. Kucskowski K: Nonobstetric surgery in the parturient: anesthetic considerations. J Clin Anes 2006; 18:5–7.
                                  8. Pearl J, Price R, Richardson W, Fanelli R: Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, and use of laparoscopy for surgical problems
                                     during pregnancy. Surg Endosc 2011; 25:3479–92.
                                  9. Practice Guidelines by the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES). Published 1/2011.
                                     Accessed 08/2012.
                                 10. Steinbrook RA, Bhavani-Shankar K: Hemodynamics during laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. Anesth Analg 2001; 93:1570–1.
                                 11. Upadhyay A, et al: Laparoscopic management of a nonobstetric emergency in the third trimester of pregnancy. Surg Endosc
                                     2007; 21:1344–8.
        General Surgery

===== PAGE 623 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.8 Pancreatic
                                            Surgery

                                            surgeon
                                            Jeffrey A. Norton, MD

                                            anesthesiologist
                                            Martin S. Angst, MD

===== PAGE 624 =====
OPERATIVE DRAINAGE FOR PANCREATITIS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Surgical treatment for pancreatitis is indicated for drainage or debridement of infected p              eripancreatic
                                tissue or pancreatic necrosis. Pancreatic necrosis is defined by areas of poor perfusion in the pancreas on CT-
                                angiogram. Infected pancreatic necrosis occurs with the presence of gas and/or bacterial invasion. Pancreatic
                                abscesses usually develop in the lesser sac, but may spread to the subphrenic spaces or into the pericolic gutters.
                                 Fistulization into adjacent organs, particularly the transverse colon and duodenum may occur. Severe intraabdomi-
                                  nal hemorrhage from erosion into major arteries lying adjacent to the pancreas is uncommon, but may occur prior to,
                                  during, or after operative drainage. Intraop, exploration of the peritoneal cavity is performed before opening the lesser
                                   sac. Areas lateral to the left and right sides of the colon, as well as the base of the transverse mesocolon and the subhepatic
                                   areas, should be palpated to identify fluid or abscess collections. The gastrocolic ligament is then incised to approach
                                   the pancreas through the lesser sac. There are different operative approaches, depending on location of involved
                                   tissue and surgeon’s preference. Upper midline or transverse abdominal incisions are used most often. Posterior
                                   drainage through the bed of the 12th rib, or retroperitoneal lateral approaches, may be used (Fig. 7.8-1). Recently,
                                   laparoscopic opening between the stomach and retroperitoneum has also been used in select cases.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Severe pancreatitis 2° to gallstones, alcohol, or post ERCP.

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                      Supine or rotated slightly (Fig. 7.8-1) for posterior approach
        General Surgery

                                 Incision                      Midline, transverse, flank, or synchronous anterior and posterior

                                 Unique considerations         Must perform adequate debridement of necrotic tissue and provide adequate drainage of
                                                               abdomen; NG tube; jejunal feeding tube

                                 Antibiotics                   Cefoxitin 1–2 g 30 min preop, or antibiotic directed at cultured organisms

                                 VTE prophylaxis               Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time                 1–2 h

                                 Closing considerations        Adequate drainage of pancreatic bed and fluid resuscitation of patient

                                 EBL                           300–750 mL

                                 Postop care                   Routine wound and drain care; usually ICU and intubated; often, subsequent operative
                                                               procedures are required.

                                 Mortality                     8–30%

                                 Morbidity                     Fistulae formation: 18–55%
                                                               Delayed gastric emptying: 50%
                                                               Unremitting sepsis: 10–30%
                                                               Atelectasis: 5–10%
                                                               Respiratory deterioration: 5%
                                                               Hemorrhage
                                                               Bowel perforations

                                 Pain score                    7–9

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                    30–60 yr

                                 Male:Female                  1:1

                                 Incidence                    10–30% of patients with pancreatitis

                                 Etiology                     Alcoholism (30–50%); postop pancreatitis (15–40%); biliary tract disease (20–30%); idiopathic
                                                              pancreatitis (15–20%)

                                 Associated conditions        Malnutrition; glucose intolerance; multiorgan dysfunction
                          624

===== PAGE 625 =====
Drainage of pancreatic pseudocyst             625

                               Figure 7.8-1. Incision for anterior and posterior drainage in pancreatitis. Note that
                               bed or table is rotated until patient is almost supine. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Berne TV, Donovan AJ: Synchronous anterior and posterior drainage of pancreatic
                               abscess. Arch Surg 1981; 116:527–33. Copyright 1981, American Medical Association.)

                                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pancreatic Surgery, p. 634.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Berne TV: Pancreatic abscesses. Probl Gen Surg 1984; 1:569–82.
                     2. Bradley EL: Fifteen-year experience with open drainage for infected pancreatic necrosis. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1993; 177(3):
                        215–22.
                     3. Feranandez-del Castillo C, Rattner DW, Makary MA, et al: Debridement and closed packing for the treatment of necrotizing
                        pancreatitis. Ann Surg 1998; 228:676–84.
                     4. Freeman ML, Werner J, van Santovoort MC, et al: Interventions for necrotizing pancreatitis. Pancreas 2012; 41:1176.
                     5. Gotzinger P, Sautner T, Kriwanek S, et al: Surgical treatment for severe acute pancreatitis: extent and surgical control of
                        necrosis determine outcome. World J Surg 2002; 474–8.
                     6. Shinzeki M, Ueda T, Takeyama Y, et al: Prediction of early death in severe acute pancreatitis. J Gastroenteral 2008; 43:152–8.
                     7. Villazon A, Villazon O, Terrazas F, et al: Retroperitoneal drainage in the management of the septic phase of severe acute
                        pancreatitis. World J Surg 1991; 15:103–8.

                   DRAINAGE OF PANCREATIC PSEUDOCYST
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Internal drainage of a pancreatic pseudocyst may be accomplished by anastomosing the cyst to the
                   stomach, duodenum, or other small bowel via a Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum. The procedure of choice for internal
                    decompression depends on the location of the pseudocyst in relation to the portion of the GI tract that will provide
                     maximal dependent drainage of the cyst. Both open and laparoscopic procedures have been used with success. The
                     two approaches should be equivalent. Operation is reserved for patients with refractory symptoms. At operation, the
                     abdomen is entered via a midline incision or laparoscopically. The pseudocyst is localized by palpation with or with-
                     out intraoperative ultrasound. If the pseudocyst lies behind the stomach (or duodenum), it is approached anteriorly,
                     through the posterior wall of the stomach (or duodenum). A portion of the posterior wall is excised, allowing entry into
                     the cyst cavity, which is then drained. An anastomosis is created between the cyst and stomach (or duodenum). The
                     anterior wall of the stomach (or duodenum) is then closed. If the cyst presents inferior to the stomach, it is anastomosed

===== PAGE 626 =====
626   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                            Figure 7.8-2. Roux-en-Y drainage of a pseudocyst. (Reproduced with permission
                                            from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott
                                            Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                in a similar fashion to a Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum (Fig. 7.8-2). Drains are placed; external drainage is sometimes neces-
        General Surgery

                                sary, especially in the setting of infection. Spontaneous resolution of pancreatic pseudocyst may be expected in most
                                patients with cysts < 6 cm. If infection of the pseudocyst occurs with clinical signs of sepsis, percutaneous drainage
                                under CT guidance can be performed, although subsequent operative drainage is often necessary.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Pancreatic pseudocyst 2° to acute pancreatitis refractory to medical management

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine

                                 Incision                 Midline abdominal or transverse

                                 Unique                   Location of pseudocyst in relation to GI tract; NG tube
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv 30 min preop

                                 VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time            1–2 h

                                 Closing                  Adequate drainage
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                      100–300 mL

                                 Postop care              ± NG decompression

                                 Mortality                5–10%

                                 Morbidity                Bleeding: 5–7%
                                                          Sepsis: < 5%
                                                          Recurrence: 2–3%

                                 Pain score               6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                15–80 yr

                                 Male:Female              1:1

===== PAGE 627 =====
longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy            627

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (cont’d)
                     Incidence                Rare

                     Etiology                 Acute pancreatitis; trauma

                     Associated               Acute pancreatitis: 90%; gallstones; alcohol use; chronic pain
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pancreatic Surgery, p. 634.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Barthlet M, Lamblin G, Gasmi M, et al: Clinical usefulness of a treatment algorithm for pancreatic pseudocysts. Gastrointest
                        Endosc 2008; 67:245–52.
                     2. Mori T, Abe N, Sugiyama M, et al: Laparoscopic pancreatic cystogastrostomy. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 2002;
                        9:548.
                     3. Neff R: Pancreatic pseudocysts and fluid collections. Surg Clin North Am 2001; 81(2):399–403.

                   LONGITUDINAL PANCREATICOJEJUNOSTOMY

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pancreaticojejunostomy, as described by Puestow, is typically done for chronic pancreatitis with
                   pancreatic ductal obstruction. It consists of a longitudinal opening of the pancreatic duct, which is then anastomosed
                   to a Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum (Fig. 7.8-3). This approach is necessary to ensure adequate drainage of a duct with
                   multiple strictures and dilations. Through a midline or transverse abdominal incision, the pancreas is exposed by
                   mobilizing the duodenum (Kocher maneuver), exposing the head of the pancreas, and opening the lesser sac to
                   visualize the body and tail. The pancreatic duct may be aspirated to identify its location, and intraoperative ultra-
                    sound is commonly used, then it is incised longitudinally. A Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum is then brought up to the
                    pancreas and anastomosed to the opened duct. A drain is left along the anastomosis, and the wound is closed in the
                    usual fashion.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: A Whipple resection (pancreaticoduodenectomy; see p. 632) is an alter-
                   native surgical treatment for chronic pancreatitis confined to the head of the gland. Rarely, subtotal or near-total
                   pancreatectomy is indicated. Fry procedure is near-total pancreatectomy with Roux-en-y drainage of the pancreatic
                   head, and Beger procedure is doudenal presenting pancreatic head resection.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Abdominal pain with chronic pancreatitis and dilated pancreatic duct (chain of lakes)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Supine

                     Incision                 Midline abdominal or transverse

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv

                     VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq

                     Surgical time            2–3 h

                     Closing                  Adequate drainage
                       considerations

                     EBL                      300–400 mL

                     Postop care              Monitor for glucose intolerance

===== PAGE 628 =====
628   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Mortality                 1–4%

                                 Morbidity                 Failure to relieve pain: 25–50%
                                                           Pancreatic leak: 5–10%
                                                           Wound infection: 5%

                                 Pain score                6–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 17–72 yr

                                 Male:Female               2.5:1

                                 Etiology                  Alcoholism; biliary tract disease; idiopathic; trauma; familial pancreatitis

                                 Associated                Biliary tract disease (25–50%); hyperparathyroidism (< 5%); chronic pain; narcotic dependency
                                   conditions

                                                                      Pancreas
        General Surgery

                                                                                                                   Stomach

                                                                                                             Jejunum

                                                                                                      Duodenum

                                                                                                Puestow
                                                                                                procedure

                                            Figure 7.8-3. Operative management of chronic pancreatitis with onlay Roux-en-Y
                                            pancreaticojejunostomy (Puestow). (Reproduced with permission from Hardy JD:
                                            Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Pancreatic Surgery, p. 634.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Nealon WH, Aatin S: Analysis of success in preventing recurrent acute exacerbations in chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg 2001;
                                     233:793–800.
                                  2. Yin Z, Sun J, Yin D, et al: Surgical treatment strategies in chronic pancreatitis. Arch Surg 2012; 147:961.

===== PAGE 629 =====
pancreatectomy   629

                   PANCREATECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Distal pancreatectomy is performed for tumors in the distal half of the pancreas (Fig. 7.8-4). The
                   lesser sac is opened by dividing the gastrocolic ligament. After entering the lesser sac, the gastrosplenic ligament
                   is divided, ligating the short gastric vessels and the left gastroepiploic vessel. The peritoneum is incised along the
                   inferior surface of the pancreas, with care being taken to avoid injury to the middle colic vessels. Following mobiliza-
                   tion of the spleen, the splenic artery is ligated near its origin. The inferior mesenteric vein is ligated sometimes at the
                   inferior border of the pancreas, and the splenic vein is ligated at the proposed point of transection. The transected
                   pancreas (Fig. 7.8-5) is usually stapled and drained, although some surgeons suture the cut end and ligate the duct.
                   The spleen may be preserved when operating for benign disease. This surgery is being done laparoscopically. One
                   method to preserve the spleen is not dividing the short gastric vessels, but still dividing the splenic artery and vein.

                   Variant procedure or approaches: Subtotal pancreatectomy usually implies resecting the pancreas from the
                   mesenteric vessels distally, leaving the head and uncinate process intact. This procedure may be performed for
                   tumor or chronic pancreatitis. Child’s procedure (near-total pancreatectomy) consists of removing the entire
                   pancreas except a rim of tissue along the lesser curvature of the duodenum (Fig. 7.8-6); preserving the duodenum
                   makes it unnecessary to reconstruct the bile duct. This procedure is usually reserved for patients with chronic
                   pancreatitis.

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of pancreas; islet cell tumors; cystic neoplasms; chronic pancreatitis; solid

                                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                   pseudopapillary tumors

                                                                                                       Dorsal pancreatic artery
                                                                              Celiac artery
                                                                                                             Splenic artery
                                                                                 Left gastric artery
                                                      Common hepatic artery
                                                      Portal vein

                                           Common bile duct

                                       Gastroduodenal artery

                                                                                                                                  Splenic vein
                                                                                                                   Inferior mesenteric vein
                        Superior pancreaticoduodenal
                        artery
                                                                                                                   Superior mesenteric
                                                                                                                   artery and vein

                             Inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery

                               Figure 7.8-4. Pancreatic anatomy. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner
                               CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                               Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 630 =====
630   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                                                                                                     Spleen

                                                                             Tumor

                                                                                                    Stapler
                                                    Pancreas

                                                                                     Superior mesenteric artery
                                                                                     Superior mesenteric vein

                                         Figure 7.8-5. Resection of distal pancreas. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-
        General Surgery

                                         Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                         Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                                    Gastroduodenal a.                              Splenic a.

                                                                                                        Splenic v.

                                                                                                    Superior
                                                                                                    mesenteric a.
                                                       Pancreatic
                                                       duct                                    Superior
                                                                                               mesenteric v.

                                         Figure 7.8-6. Near-total pancreatectomy. Shown is the operative field at the conclusion
                                         of the procedure. (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of
                                         Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1997.)

===== PAGE 631 =====
pancreatectomy          631

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                           Subtotal
                                                      Distal Pancreatectomy                Pancreatectomy              Child’s Procedure

                     Position                         Supine                               ⇐                           ⇐

                     Incision                         Midline abdominal or                 ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      transverse

                     Unique considerations            NG tube                              ⇐                           Preservation of vasculature of
                                                                                                                       duodenum

                     Antibiotics                      Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv                   ⇐                           ⇐

                     VTE prophylaxis                  Heparin 5000 units sq                ⇐                           ⇐

                     Surgical time                    2–3 h                                ⇐                           3–4 h

                     Closing                          Adequate drainage                    ⇐                           ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                              300–500 mL                           500–750 mL                  500–1000 mL

                     Postop care                      NG decompression; PACU               ⇐                           ⇐

                     Mortality                        < 5%                                 ⇐                           ⇐

                                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                     Morbidity                        Diabetes: 5%                         ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Wound infection: 5%                  ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Pancreatic fistula: < 5%             ⇐                           90%
                                                      Common bile duct injury              ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Hemorrhage                           ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Duodenal necrosis                    ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Pancreatic leakage                   ⇐                           ⇐
                                                      Pancreatic insufficiency             ⇐                           ⇐

                     Pain score                       6–8                                  6–8                         6–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                 30–60 yr

                     Male:Female               1:1

                     Incidence                 ~26,000/yr in the United States.

                     Etiology                  Adenocarcinoma; chronic pancreatitis; islet cell tumors

                     Associated                Alcoholism and biliary tract disease with chronic pancreatitis (90%); other endocrine disorders
                       conditions              (3–5%)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Pancreatic Surgery, p. 634.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Ding X, Tan J, Qian J: Laparoscopic spleen preserving distal pancreatectomy. Hepatogastroenterology 2012; 60:10.5754.
                     2. Samuel I, Joehl RJ: Chronic pancreatitis. In: Mulholland MW, et al., eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 849–60.

===== PAGE 632 =====
632   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                WHIPPLE RESECTION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: A Whipple resection is usually done for pancreatic cancer. It consists of a pancreaticoduodenectomy,
                                followed by a pancreaticojejunostomy, a hepaticojejunostomy, and a gastrojejunostomy (Fig. 7.8-7). On entering
                                the peritoneal cavity, the resectability of the pancreatic tumor is determined. Contraindications to standard resection
                                include liver or peritoneal metastases; involvement of the superior mesenteric vessels; infiltration by tumor into root
                                of the mesentery; and extension into the porta hepatis, with involvement of the hepatic artery. If the tumor is deemed
                                resectable, further mobilization of the head of the pancreas is performed. The common duct is transected above the
                                cystic duct entry, and the gall bladder is removed. After the superior mesenteric vein is freed from the pancreas, the
                                latter is transected, with care being taken not to injure the splenic vein. The duodenum is transected 2 cm distal to

                                                                                       B Retained

                                                                                           Biliary tree
                                                                                                                        Stomach

                                               A Resected
        General Surgery

                                                                 Pancreatic
                                                                   tumor

                                                                                  Distal
                                                                                stomach
                                                                                                                               Pancreas

                                                                                                                                  Jejunum
                                              Gall                              num
                                                                          o  de
                                              bladder                   Du

                                                                                                      Stomach

                                                                                                                    Pancreas
                                               Biliary tree

                                                                                                                       Jejunum

                                                                                                 C Reconstruction

                                          Figure 7.8-7. Standard pancreaticoduodenectomy. A: Structures resected, including
                                          distal stomach, entire duodenum, head and neck of pancreas with tumor, gallbladder,
                                          and distal extrahepatic biliary tree. B: Structures retained, including proximal stomach,
                                          body and tail of pancreas, proximal biliary tree, and jejunum distal to ligament of
                                          Treitz. C: Reconstruction: proximal pancreaticojejunostomy, hepaticojejunostomy
                                          over T tube, and distal gastrojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Hardy
                                          JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia: 1988.)

===== PAGE 633 =====
whipple resection   633

                   the pylorus, or the stomach proximal to the pylorus if involved by tumor. The jejunum is transected 20 cm beyond
                   the ligament of Treitz and the specimen is removed by severing the vascular connections with the mesenteric vessels.
                   Reconstitution is achieved by anastomosing the pancreatic stump, bile duct, and duodenum into the jejunum. Drains
                   are placed adjacent to the pancreatic anastomosis.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: There are several variants that consist of extensions of the Whipple proce-
                   dure: total pancreatectomy; regional pancreatectomy, involving resection and reconstruction of the retropancre-
                   atic superior mesenteric vein and/or artery; and the pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy as described
                   above. In addition, the distal pancreatic stump may be anastomosed to the posterior wall of the stomach.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Carcinoma of the pancreas; malignant cystadenomas; chronic pancreatitis

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                            Regional
                                                    Whipple                               Total Pancreatectomy              Pancreatectomy

                     Position                       Supine                                ⇐                                 ⇐

                     Incision                       Midline abdominal or transverse       ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                    (chevron)

                     Unique considerations          Large-bore iv lines                   ⇐                                 ⇐

                     Antibiotics                    Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv                    ⇐                                 ⇐

                     VTE prophylaxis                Heparin 5000 units sq

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                     Surgical time                  4–5 h                                 4–6 h                             5–6 h

                     Closing considerations         Adequate drainage                     ⇐                                 ⇐

                     EBL                            500–750 mL                            750–1000 mL                       750–1500 mL

                     Postop care                    NG decompression; PACU/ICU            NG decompression; diabetes
                                                                                          management

                     Mortality                      5–10%                                 12%                               15%

                     Morbidity                      Delayed gastric emptying: 25%         ⇐                                 ⇐
                                                    Pancreatic fistula: 10–20%            NA                                10–20%
                                                    Sepsis: 5–15%                         5%                                25%
                                                    Hemorrhage: 5%                        < 5%                              5%
                                                    MI: 1–3%                              ⇐                                 < 5%
                                                    Biliary fistula: < 2%                 <1%                               < 2%

                     Pain score                     7–9                                   7–9                               7–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (for cancer of pancreas)
                     Age range                40–80 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                10th most common cancer in the United States. (~33,000/yr)

                     Etiology                 Familial and genetic factors (p16, K-vas); tobacco; diabetes; alcohol; diet; pancreatitis

                     Associated               See Etiology, above.
                       conditions

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Fernandez-del Castillo C, Morales-Oyarvide V, McGrath D, et al: Evolution of the Whipple procedure at Massachusetts
                        General Hospital. Surgery 2012; 152:556.

===== PAGE 634 =====
634   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR PANCREATIC SURGERY
                                (Procedures covered: drainage for pancreatitis; drainage of pancreatic pseudocyst; pancreaticojejunostomy;
                                pancreatectomy; Whipple resection)

                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients presenting for pancreatic surgery can be divided into four groups: (1) those with acute pancreatitis, who
                                failed medical treatment and may be extremely ill, presenting for operative excision or drainage of necrotic or in-
                                fected foci; (2) patients with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas; (3) patients with neuroendocrine active (60–70%) or
                                inactive islet cell tumors (mainly insulinoma and gastrinoma; rarely VIP-oma and glucagonoma); and (4) patients
                                suffering from the sequelae of chronic pancreatitis (e.g., pseudocyst or abscess).

                                Respiratory              Respiratory compromise—such as pleural effusions, atelectasis, and ARDS, progressing
                                                         to respiratory failure, may occur in up to 50% of patients with acute pancreatitis. Postop
                                                         mechanical ventilation may be needed for these patients
                                                         Tests: Consider CXR; ABG; others as indicated from H&P.

                                Cardiovascular           Patients with acute pancreatitis may suffer from severe intravascular volume depletion 2°
                                                         plasma exudation and in severe cases 2° hemorrhage (erosion of blood vessels). Aggressive
                                                         volume resuscitation with crystalloids, colloids, and blood products may be required dur-
                                                         ing surgery. Hypocalcemia is often present (arrhythmias and ↓ myocardial contractility).
                                                         Serum K+ may be elevated (2° acidosis or renal failure associated with acute pancreatitis)
                                                         or decreased (2° watery diarrhea associated with gastrinoma, VIP-oma, prolonged NG suc-
                                                         tion) and should be corrected before surgery. Hypokalemia resistant to K+ replacement
        General Surgery

                                                         may point to ↓ Mg++ and warrants replacement.
                                                         Tests: ECG; electrolytes; others as indicated from H&P

                                Gastrointestinal         Jaundice and abdominal pain are common presenting Sx in this group of patients. The pres-
                                                         ence of ileus (common in acute pancreatitis) or intestinal obstruction should mandate full-
                                                         stomach precautions and rapid-sequence induction. Electrolyte abnormalities are common
                                                         and may be 2° metabolic acidosis (↑ K+ 2° acute pancreatitis) or alkalosis and intestinal loss-
                                                         es (↓ K+ and ↓ Mg++ 2° diarrhea, NG suction). Acute pancreatitis is associated with ↓ Ca++
                                                         (omental fat saponification) and ↑ Na+ (dehydration). Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syn-
                                                         drome) is associated with diarrhea, severe peptic ulcer, and GERD. VIP-oma often causes
                                                         massive watery diarrhea (up to 20 L). Electrolyte abnormalities should be treated preop.
                                                         Tests: Electrolytes; glucose; LFTs; others as indicated from H&P

                                Renal                    Patients should be evaluated for renal insufficiency predominantly 2° dehydration, with
                                                         anesthetic plan adjusted accordingly.
                                                         Tests: BUN; creatinine; others as indicated from H&P

                                Endocrine                Many patients with acute pancreatitis have diabetes 2° loss of islet cells. Endocrine t umors
                                                         of the pancreas are linked (10–30%) with multiple endocrine syndrome type I (MEN
                                                         1; Wermer’s syndrome), including adenoma of the parathyroid gland (> 90%), the pitu-
                                                         itary gland (20–30%), and the pancreas (~50%). Hyperparathyroidism is common, some
                                                         pituitary adenomas secrete prolactin > growth hormone > ACTH, and some pancreatic
                                                         island cell tumors secrete gastrin > insulin >> VIP, glucagon. Insulinoma can result in
                                                         severe hypoglycemia necessitating frequent perioperative blood glucose measurements.
                                                         Surgical manipulation of the insulinoma may result in massive release of insulin. VIP-
                                                          oma (Verner-Morrison syndrome) can be associated with hypercalcemia.
                                                          Tests: Electrolytes; glucose; others as indicated from H&P

                                Hematologic              Hct may be falsely elevated, 2° hemoconcentration, or low, 2° hemorrhage. Coagulopathy
                                                         may be present (DIC).
                                                         Tests: CBC with differential; Plt; consider PT, PTT, fibrinogen, D-Dimer.

                                Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg. Note: full-stomach precautions in patients with intestinal ob-
                                                         struction (see p. B-5), and consider placement and suctioning of a NGT prior to induction.

===== PAGE 635 =====
whipple resection       635

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop analgesia. If postop epidural analgesia is planned, establishing
                   correct catheter placement in the epidural space can be accomplished by injecting 1–2% lidocaine (50–100 mg) via
                   the catheter to elicit a segmental block. The use of epidural anesthetic techniques for postoperative pain management
                   in patients undergoing major, nonvascular abdominal surgery has been shown to provide superior pain control com-
                   pared with IV-PCA. However, adequate pain control can be achieved with the use of IV-PCA.

                    Induction               The patient with bowel obstruction or ileus is at risk for pulmonary aspiration, and
                                            rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure is indicated (see p. B-5). If the patient
                                             is clinically hypovolemic, restore intravascular volume (colloid, crystalloid, or blood
                                             products) prior to induction and titrate induction dose of sedative/hypnotic agents.
                                             Etomidate (0.2–0.4 mg/kg iv) or ketamine (1–3 mg/kg iv) may provide better hemody-
                                            namic stability during induction of anesthesia. Propofol is associated with a significant
                                            reduction of SVR.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Combined epidural/GA: The epidural catheter ide-
                                            ally is placed at the level of a dermatome corresponding to the surgical site (generally mid-
                                            thoracic spine). This allows the use of both lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs at the lowest
                                            possible dose and adds flexibility to the anesthesiologist’s drug selection while also mini-
                                            mizing the likelihood of side effects. A continuous infusion (after an initial bolus) is the
                                            preferred mode of administering local anesthetics via the epidural catheter because satis-
                                            factory analgesia can be achieved without major fluctuations in BP. Lower concentrations
                                            (e.g., bupivacaine 0.125–0.25%) are used to provide supplemental analgesia, while higher

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                            concentrations (e.g., bupivacaine 0.5%) generally provide optimal surgical conditions (i.e.,
                                            a complete sensory and motor block). The infusion rate is contingent on the desired seg-
                                            mental spread, but often ranges between 5–10 mL/h. Lipophilic opioids can effectively be
                                            given by continuous infusion (e.g., fentanyl 2 mcg/mL) and offer the advantage of limited
                                            segmental spread. Longer-acting hydrophilic opioids (e.g., hydromorphone 0.4 mg or mor-
                                            phine 2 mg for epidural placement at mid-thoracic spine) can be injected as a bolus along
                                            with an initial bolus dose of local anesthetics. However, hydrophilic opioids tend to spread
                                            rostrally within the intrathecal space and may cause sedation and respiratory depression
                                            if dosed too aggressively. Vulnerable patients include the elderly, patients with obstructive
                                            airway disease, and patients with ↑ BMI. The use of epidural local anesthetics is associated
                                            with sympatholysis and ↓ BP has to be anticipated. Critical ↓ BP is treated with fluids and/
                                            or vasopressors (e.g., ephedrine 5–10 mg iv). In patients undergoing a surgical procedure
                                            with a significant risk for major bleeding it is prudent to delay administration of epidural
                                            local anesthetics until the critical part of surgery has been completed. Systemic sedatives
                                            (e.g., opiates and benzodiazepines) should be minimized as they increase the likelihood of
                                            postop respiratory depression.
                                            Low-dose ketamine: If the placement of an epidural catheter is not an option, the use
                                            of a low-dose ketamine iv infusion may be considered as an adjuvant analgesic regimen
                                            (e.g., 0.5 mg/kg bolus before surgical incision, followed by an infusion of 0.2 mg/kg/hr that
                                            is stopped 30 min before the end of surgery). Low-dose ketamine provides opioid-sparing
                                            effects (30–50%), reduces postoperative pain, reduces the incidence of opioid-mediated
                                            side effects, decreases postop wound hyperalgesia, and may decrease development of
                                            chronic pain after surgery. Escalating ketamine doses beyond 30 mg/d is unlikely associ-
                                            ated with increased opioid-sparing effects. The risk for occurrence of psychomimetic side
                                            effects appears to be low in patients undergoing general anesthesia.
                                            Gabapentin/pregabalin: Single-dose administration of 600–1200 mg gabapentin or
                                            150–300 mg pregabalin before surgery should be considered in patients not eligible for an
                                            epidural anesthetic technique. Gabapentin and pregabalin provide opioid-sparing e ffects
                                            (30–50%), reduce postop pain, somewhat lower the incidence of opioid-mediated side
                                            effects, and may decrease the development of chronic pain after surgery. Gabapentin and
                                             pregabalin can cause postop sedation. However, available data suggest the pronounced
                                             sedation only occurs in a small fraction of patients (e.g., frail and elderly).

===== PAGE 636 =====
636   c h a p t e r 7.8  Pancreatic Surgery

                                Maintenance            Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen: Perioperative administration
                                  (cont’d)             of nonselective NSAIDs, COX-2-selective NSAIDs, and acetaminophen is associated with
                                                       moderate opioid-sparing effects. Overall, NSAIDs seem to be somewhat more effective than
                                                       paracetamol and only NSAIDs have conclusively been shown to reduce opioid-mediated side
                                                       effects. Whether aggressive dosing with iv acetaminophen (1 g q 6 h) will provide additional
                                                       benefits has not been established. Potential benefits of adding NSAIDs need to be balanced
                                                       against the risk of drug-related side effects including bleeding and renal failure.

                                Emergence              The decision to extubate a patient at the end of surgery depends on the patient’s underlying
                                                       cardiopulmonary status. Patients undergoing extensive surgery with major fluid shifts may
                                                       require prolonged intubation until sufficient reduction of soft tissue edema (compromised
                                                       airway) is achieved.

                                Blood and fluid         Anticipate large fluid loss        Blood loss can be significant, and blood products should
                                   requirements         IV: 14–16 ga × 2 (particularly     be immediately available. Adequate large-bore iv access
                                                       Whipple, pancreatectomy and        is mandatory. Procedures tend to be long and extensive,
                                                        drainage/debridement for           leading to hypothermia and large 3rd-space fluid loss.
                                                        pancreatitis)                      If procedure does not involve cancer or infection, cell-
                                                        Warm fluids                        saving devices can be utilized. Intraoperative fluid man-
                                                        T&C or T&S                         agement should be titrated to a patient’s particular needs
                                                                                           (adequate peripheral perfusion, urine output > 0.5 mL/
                                                                                           kg/min, no base deficit). Overly generous intraoperative
                                                                                           fluid administration may be associated with increased
                                                                                           postoperative morbidity (e.g., delayed recovery of bowl
        General Surgery

                                                                                           function) and extended hospital stay.

                                Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1)      Most pancreatic surgery is associated with major fluid
                                                       UO                                  shifts and fluid loss. Availability of an infusion device
                                                       Arterial line                       assisting rapid delivery of intravenous fluids at body
                                                       ± CVP or PA catheter                temperature is advised. Invasive monitoring is usu-
                                                                                           ally required. In patients with cardiopulmonary com-
                                                                                           promise, a PA catheter may prove helpful for intraop
                                                                                           cardiovascular and fluid management. Use forced-air
                                                                                           warmer to maintain normothermia.
                                                       ± TEE                               TEE may be useful for assessment of volume status and
                                                                                           cardiac function.

                                Positioning            ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                       ✓ eyes

                                Complications          Hypocalcemia                        Release of pancreatic lipase → omental fat saponification.
                                                       Hypovolemia                         Extensive 3rd-spacing, major hemorrhage during pan-
                                                                                           creatic dissection.
                                                       Severe hypoglycemia                 Uncontrolled insulin release from insulinoma
                                                       Sepsis                              Manipulation of infected tissue → cardiovascular in-
                                                                                           stability, respiratory deterioration, DIC.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications          Hyperglycemia                          Total pancreatectomy is associated with a brittle di-
                                                       Electrolyte imbalance                  abetes that can be very difficult to control. Subtotal
                                                       Hypovolemia                            resections lead to variable hyperglycemia.
                                                       Hypothermia
                                                       Hypocalcemia
                                                       PONV (see p. B-6)
                                                       VTE (see p. B-8)

===== PAGE 637 =====
whipple resection        637

                    Pain                       Continuous epidural analgesia (see          Patient should be recovered in an ICU or hospital
                      management               p. C-3).                                    ward that is accustomed to treating the side effects
                                               PCA (see p. C-3).                           of epidural analgesic techniques using opiates and
                                                                                           local anaesthetics (e.g., arterial hypotension, respira-
                                                                                           tory depression, breakthrough pain, nausea, pruritus).
                                                                                           Postop pain control with an epidural rather than a
                                                                                           PCA regimen is superior in patients undergoing major
                                                                                           abdominal surgery. Particularly in high-risk patients
                                                                                           suffering from pulmonary impairment, an epidural
                                                                                           regimen may reduce the incidence of respiratory fail-
                                                                                           ure. The use of epidural (or systemic) local anesthet-
                                                                                           ics can speed up bowel recovery and reduce hospital
                                                                                           length of stay. The improvement of other major clini-
                                                                                           cal outcomes (e.g., cardiovascular) has not yet been
                                                                                           demonstrated convincingly in patients undergoing
                                                                                           nonvascular abdominal surgery.

                    Tests                      CXR (if CVP placed);                        Electrolytes; Ca++; glucose; Plts—as indicated for
                                               ABG; Hct                                    postop management.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Angst MS, Ramaswamy B, Riley ET, et al: Lumbar epidural morphine in humans and supraspinal analgesia to experimental

                                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                        heat pain. Anesthesiology 2000; 92:312–24.
                     2. Bell RF, Dahl JB, Moore RA, et al: Perioperative ketamine for acute postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;
                        25:CD004603.
                     3. Clarke H, Bonin RP, Orser BA, et al: The prevention of chronic postsurgical pain using gabapentin and pregabalin: a combined
                        systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 2012; 115:428–42.
                     4. Ginosar Y, Columb MO, Cohen SE, et al: The site of action of epidural fentanyl infusions in the presence of local anesthetics:
                        a minimum local analgesic concentration infusion study in nulliparous labor. Anesth Analg 2003; 97:1439–45.
                     5. Ho K-Y, Gan TJ, Habib AS: Gabapentin and postoperative pain–a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Pain
                        2006; 126:91–101.
                     6. Jimenez C, Gagel RF: Disorders affecting multiple endocrine systems. In: Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kaspan DL, et al, eds.
                        Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th edition. McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., New York: 2008, 2358–64.
                     7. Jorgensen H, Wetterslev J, Moinishe S, et al: Epidural local anesthetics versus opioid-based analgesic regimens on
                        postoperative gastrointestinal paralysis, PONV and pain after abdominal surgery. Cochroane Database Syst Rev 2000:
                        CDO01893.
                     8. Macario A, Royal MA: A literature review of randomized clinical trials of intravenous acetaminophen (paracetamol) for acute
                        postoperative pain. Pain Pract 2011; 11:290–6.
                     9. Maund E, McDaid C, Rice S, et al: Paracetamol and selective and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for
                        the reduction in morphine-related side-effects after major surgery: a systematic review. BR J Anaesth 2001; 115:428–42.
                    10. Murakami Y, Uemura K, Hayashidani Y, et al: No mortality after 150 consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies with duct to
                        mucosa pancreaticogastrostomy. J Surg Oncol 2008; 97:205–9.
                    11. Nakeeb A, Lillemoe KD, Yeo CJ, et al: Neoplasms of the exocrine pancreas. In: Mulholland MW, et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific
                        Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 861–79.
                    12. Nisanevich V, Felsenstein I, Almogy G, et al: Effect of intraoperative fluid management on outcome after intraabdominal
                        surgery. Anesthesiology 2005; 103:25–32.
                    13. Park WY, Thompson JS, Lee KK: Effect of epidural anesthesia and analgesia on perioperative outcome: a randomized,
                        controlled Veterans Affairs cooperative study. Ann Surg 2001; 234:560–9.
                    14. Rigg JR, Jamrozik K, Myles PS, et al: Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia and outcome of major surgery: a randomized trial.
                        Lancet 2002; 359:1276–82.
                    15. Swenson BR, Gottschalk A, Wells LT, et al: Intravenous lidocane is as effective as epidural bupivacaine in reducing ileus
                        duration, hospital stay, and pain after open colon resection: a randomized clinical trial. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010; 35:370–6.
                    16. Tiippana EM, Hamunen K, Kontinen VK, et al: Do surgical patients benefit from perioperative gabapentin/pregabalin?
                        A systematic review of efficacy and safety. Anesth Analg 2007; 104:1545–56.

===== PAGE 638 =====
c h a p t e r

                                       7.9 Peritoneal Surgery

                                            surgeons
                                            Jeffrey A. Norton, MD
                                            Harry A. Oberhelman, MD, FACS

                                            anesthesiologist
                                            Martin S. Angst, MD

===== PAGE 640 =====
EXPLORATORY OR STAGING LAPAROTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Exploratory laparotomy is indicated primarily in patients suffering abdominal trauma or other acute
                                abdominal catastrophes. It is important that a thorough and systematic intraabdominal examination be carried out
                                to prevent missing significant injuries (e.g., ruptured duodenum or transected pancreas). Any active bleeding should
                                be controlled prior to a systematic examination. Other indications for laparotomy include certain patients with fever
                                of undetermined origin or those in whom a specific diagnosis cannot be made, or for staging of selected patients with
                                Hodgkin’s disease. A staging laparotomy (Fig. 7.9-1) consists of splenectomy, wedge and needle biopsies of both
                                lobes of the liver, and biopsies of the periaortic, celiac, mesenteric, and portahepatic lymph nodes. In young women,
                                suturing (pexing) the ovaries in the midline protects them from radiation. Indications for staging in Hodgkin’s disease
                                and lymphomas vary from institution to institution, but PET /CT scans have limited their use.
                                Basically, the procedure begins with a midline abdominal incision; then the abdomen is explored, and both needle
                                and wedge biopsies of the liver may be performed. The spleen may be removed by incising the lateral peritoneal
                                attachment and delivering the spleen into the wound. The short gastric vessels are cut and ligated and the splenic
                                vessels exposed. These are cut individually and ligated, and the spleen is removed. Paraaortic nodes are exposed
                                through a left paraaortic incision in the retroperitoneum and removed for biopsy. Lymph channels are clipped to
                                prevent lymphatic leakage. The nodes dissected extend to the inferior margin of the duodenum. It may be necessary
                                to cross the aorta and biopsy any enlarged nodes on the right side. More recently, laparoscopy is being performed for
                                staging of certain intraabdominal malignancies (e.g., pancreatic and gastric cancer); however, its use has decreased
        General Surgery

                                with improved multiphasic CT scans.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Abdominal trauma; Hodgkin’s disease or other lymphomas

                                          Figure 7.9-1. Staging laparotomy. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner
                                          CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                          Philadelphia: 2003.)

                          640

===== PAGE 641 =====
Exploratory or Staging Laparotomy      641

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                           Staging Laparotomy                            Exploratory Laparotomy

                     Position              Supine                                        ⇐

                     Incision              Midline abdominal                             ⇐ or transverse

                     Special               Abdominal retractor                           ⇐
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                Ovarian pexy                                  Careful monitoring of VS in trauma patients
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics           Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv                            Cefazolin iv 1–2 g

                     VTE prophylaxis       Heparin 5000 units sq                         ⇐

                     Surgical time         1.5–2 h                                       Variable, 1–2 h+

                     Closing               Splenic bed hemostasis                        Hemostasis
                       considerations

                     EBL                   100–200 mL                                    Variable, 200–500 mL

                     Postop care           ± NG decompression; PACU → ward               ICU for trauma patients

                     Mortality             < 1%                                          2–5%

                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                     Morbidity             Prolonged ileus: 10–15%                       ⇐
                                           Pulmonary complications: 5–10%                Atelectasis: 5–10%
                                           Wound infection: 2–3%                         Wound infection: 5–10%
                                           Small bowel obstruction: 1%                   Hemorrhage: 1–3%
                                           Intraperitoneal bleeding: < 1%                Pneumonia: < 1%

                     Pain score            6–8                                           6–8

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             15–60 yr                                      15–75 yr

                     Male:Female           1:1.5                                         1:1

                     Incidence             Common                                        ⇐

                     Etiology              Unknown                                       Trauma

                     Associated            Hodgkin’s disease (95%); lymphoma (5%)        Other visceral or vascular injuries in trauma
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: exploratory/staging laparotomy that is not trauma-related; splenectomy)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Typically, nongynecologic patients presenting for staging laparotomy (which may include splenectomy) have
                   Hodgkin’s disease, or other lymphomatous or cancerous disorders. Apart from the primary disease, these patients
                   are often in reasonably good health and will not have had radiation or chemotherapy before the staging laparotomy.
                   Patients presenting for splenectomy may be divided into two less healthy groups: (a) trauma patients (whose man-
                   agement is described in Trauma Surgery, p. 751) and (b) a more complex group with myeloproliferative disorders

===== PAGE 642 =====
642   c h a p t e r 7.9   Peritoneal Surgery

                                and other varieties of hypersplenism. The periop management of these two groups is more complicated. The latter
                                group may have received chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy, which may affect a variety of organ systems. It is
                                incumbent on the anesthesiologist to be aware of the periop implications of these adjunctive treatments. The actual
                                extent of a staging or exploratory laparotomy can vary substantially. A good understanding of the surgeon’s plan and
                                its inherent risks (e.g., removing tumor in close proximity to a major blood vessel) is crucial for providing adequate
                                anesthesia care.

                                Respiratory               Patients who have splenomegaly may have a degree of left lower lobe atelectasis
                                                          and compromised ventilation 2° intraabdominal pathology: ↓ FRC → ↑ A-a gradi-
                                                          ent + ↓ PaO2. This should be evaluated by physical exam. Some may have been treated
                                                          with chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., bleomycin at a total dose > 200 mg/m2) that cause
                                                          pulmonary pathology including fibrosis. Toxic drug effects are potentiated by smoking,
                                                          XRT, and high FiO2.
                                                          Tests: CXR, PFTs, and ABG as clinically indicated

                                Cardiovascular            Patients with systemic disease requiring splenectomy may be chronically ill and have ↓
                                                          cardiovascular reserve. Patients who have received certain chemotherapeutic agents (e.g.,
                                                          doxorubicin at a dose > 550 mg/m2) may suffer from cardiotoxic side effects that can be
                                                          worsened by XRT. Manifestations include CHF and dysrhythmias.
                                                          Tests: ECG, ECHO, and stress test as clinically indicated

                                Neurological              Patients may have neurological deficits from receiving certain chemotherapeutic agents
                                                          (e.g., peripheral neuropathies caused by vinblastine and cisplatin or CNS pathology
                                                          caused by 5-fluorouracil and mithramycin). Evidence of neurologic dysfunction should be
        General Surgery

                                                          documented in the preop evaluation.

                                Hematologic               Patients are likely to present with splenomegaly 2° hematologic disease (e.g., Hodgkin’s disease,
                                                          non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, chronic leukemia, myeloid metaplasia, thrombotic thrombocyto-
                                                          penic purpura, idiopathic autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and sickle cell disease). Cytopenia
                                                          is very common. Preop replacement of platelets should be considered in patients with severe
                                                          thrombocytopenia. However, the effectiveness of preop platelet replacement may be limited
                                                          in patients with hypersplenism because transfused platelets are mostly sequestrated by the
                                                          spleen. Myelosuppression should be anticipated in all patients receiving active chemotherapy.
                                                          Tests: CBC

                                Hepatic                   Some chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., methotrexate and mithramycin) may be hepatotoxic.
                                                          Evaluation of LFTs should be considered in patients at risk.
                                                          Tests: LFTs including INR

                                Renal                     Some chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., methotrexate and cisplatin) are nephrotoxic, and
                                                          patients may present with impaired renal function.
                                                          Tests: BUN, creatinine and electrolytes

                                Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication             Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. In patients with suspected gastrointestinal stasis the use of
                                                          full-stomach precautions should be considered (see p. B-5) to minimize the risk of pulmo-
                                                          nary aspiration. A supplemental intravenous steroid dose (e.g., 25–100 mg hydrocortisone)
                                                          should be considered in patients receiving preop corticosteroids as part of their chemo-
                                                          therapeutic regimen.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop analgesia. If postop epidural analgesia is planned, placement of
                                catheter prior to anesthetic induction is helpful to establish correct placement in the epidural space (accomplished
                                by injecting 1–2% lidocaine (50–100 mg) via the epidural catheter to elicit a segmental block). The use of epidural
                                anesthetic techniques for postoperative pain control in patients undergoing major, nonvascular abdominal surgery
                                has been shown to provide superior pain control compared with IV-PCA. However, adequate pain control can be
                                achieved with the use of IV-PCA.

===== PAGE 643 =====
Exploratory or Staging Laparotomy           643

                    Induction          Standard induction (see p. B-2) except in patients at risk for pulmonary aspiration, who
                                       require a rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5).

                    Maintenance        Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). High inspired O2 concentrations (> 30%) may aggravate
                                         chemotherapy-induced (e.g., bleomycin) lung injuries. Combined epidural/GA: The
                                         epidural catheter ideally is placed at a level corresponding to the surgical site (generally low
                                         to mid-thoracic). This allows the use of both lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs at the lowest
                                         possible dose, adds flexibility to the anesthesiologist’s choice of agents, and minimizes the
                                         likelihood of side effects. A continuous infusion (after an initial bolus dose) is the preferred
                                         mode of administering epidural local anesthetics because satisfactory analgesia can be
                                         achieved with less fluctuations in BP. Lower concentrations of bupivacaine (0.125–0.25%)
                                         can be infused to provide supplemental analgesia, whereas higher concentrations (0.5%)
                                         may improve surgical conditions (complete sensory and motor block). The infusion rate
                                         is contingent on the desired segmental spread, but often ranges between 5 and 10 mL/h.
                                       Lipophilic opiods (e.g., fentanyl) can effectively be given by continuous infusion. Longer-
                                         acting hydrophilic opioids (e.g., hydromorphone 0.4 mg or morphine 2 mg for an epidural
                                         placement at the lower to mid-thoracic spine) can be injected as a bolus along with the
                                         initial bolus dose of a local anesthetic. However, hydrophilic opioids tend to spread ros-
                                         trally within the intrathecal space and may cause sedation and respiratory depression if
                                         dosed too aggressively. Vulnerable patients include the elderly, patients with obstructive
                                         airway disease, and patients suffering from obesity. The use of epidural local anesthetics is
                                         associated with sympatholysis, and ↓ BP has to be anticipated. Critical ↓ BP is treated with
                                         fluids iv and/or vasopressors (e.g., ephedrine 5–10 mg iv). In patients undergoing a surgical

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                         procedure with a significant risk for major bleeding, it is prudent to delay administration
                                         of epidural local anesthetics until the critical part of surgery has been completed. Systemic
                                         sedatives (e.g., opiates and benzodiazepines) should be minimized as they increase the
                                         likelihood of postop respiratory depression.
                                         Low-dose ketamine: If the placement of an epidural catheter is not an option, the use
                                         of a low-dose ketamine iv infusion may be considered as an adjuvant analgesic regimen
                                         (e.g., 0.5 mg/kg bolus before surgical incision, followed by an infusion of 0.2 mg/kg/h that
                                         is stopped 30 min before the end of surgery). Low-dose ketamine provides opioid-sparing
                                         effects (30–50%), reduces postop pain, decreases the incidence of opioid-mediated side
                                         effects, reduces wound hyperalgesia, and may decrease the development of chronic pain
                                         after surgery. Escalating ketamine doses beyond 30 mg/d is not associated with increased
                                         opioid-sparing effects. The risk for the occurrence of psychomimetic side effects appears
                                         to be low in patients undergoing general anesthesia.
                                         Gabapentin/pregabalin: Single-dose administration of 600–1200 mg gabapentin or
                                         150–300 mg pregabalin before surgery should be considered in patients not eligible for an
                                         epidural anesthetic technique. Gabapentin and pregabalin provide opioid-sparing e ffects
                                       (30–50%), reduce postop pain, somewhat lower the incidence of opioid-mediated side
                                        effects, and may decrease the development of chronic pain after surgery. Gabapentin and
                                       pregabalin can cause postop sedation. However, available data suggest that pronounced
                                       sedation only occurs in a small fraction of patients (e.g., frail and elderly).
                                       Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen: Perioperative administra-
                                       tion of nonselective NSAIDs, COX-2-selective NSAIDs and acetaminophen is associated
                                       with moderate opioid-sparing effects. Overall, NSAIDs seem to be somewhat more ef-
                                       fective than acetaminophen, and only NSAIDs have conclusively been shown to reduce
                                       opioid-mediated side effects. Whether aggressive dosing with iv acetaminophen (1 g q
                                       6 h) will provide additional benefits has not been established. Potential benefits of adding
                                       NSAIDs need to be balanced against the risk of drug-related side effects including bleeding
                                       and renal failure.

                    Emergence          Most patients can be extubated at the end of surgery. Patients undergoing extensive surgery
                                       with major fluid shifts may require prolonged intubation until cardiovascular stability and
                                       sufficient reduction of soft-tissue edema (compromised airway) is achieved.

===== PAGE 644 =====
644   c h a p t e r 7.9   Peritoneal Surgery

                                Blood and fluid         IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                      Potential for major blood loss. In patients with diffi-
                                   requirements                                                 cult iv access, postinduction placement of addition-
                                                                                                al access is prudent. In splenectomy patients with
                                                                                                hypersplenism, Plt transfusion is best given after
                                                                                                ligation of the splenic vessel (avoid sequestration).
                                                        Anticipate large fluid loss             Intraoperative fluid therapy should be titrated to a pa-
                                                        IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                      tient’s particular needs (adequate peripheral perfusion,
                                                        Warm fluids                             urine output > 0.5 mL/kg/h, no base deficit). Overly
                                                        T&C or T&S                              generous intraoperative fluid administration may be
                                                                                                associated with postoperative morbidity (e.g., delayed
                                                                                                recovery of bowl function) and extended hospital stay.

                                Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1).         Others as indicated by patient’s status. To prevent
                                                        UO                                      hypothermia during long operations, use warming
                                                        ± Arterial line                         blanket(s), consider heated humidifier and warming
                                                        ± CVP (large volume shifts, need        room temperature. Place an arterial line in patients
                                                        for vaso-active drugs, postop care)     with hemodynamic instability or those at risk for
                                                        ± TEE (assessment of volume status)     significant intraop bleeding. Availability of a rapid
                                                                                                infusion device for delivery of IV fluids at body tem-
                                                                                                perature should be considered in patients at risk for
                                                                                                large blood loss. Consider CVP for guiding fluid
                                                                                                management, particularly in patients with concom-
                                                                                                itant cardiovascular disease.
        General Surgery

                                Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                        3 eyes

                                Complications           Unexpected bleeding                     Plt transfusion may be necessary.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications           Bleeding                                Patient should be recovered in ICU or hospital
                                                        Atelectasis (usually left lower lobe)   ward that is accustomed to treating side effects of
                                                        PONV (see p. B-6)                       epidural local anesthetics and opiates (e.g., arterial
                                                        VTE (see p. B-8)                        hypotension, respiratory depression, breakthrough
                                                                                                pain, nausea, pruritus).

                                Pain                    Epidural analgesia                      Postop pain control with an epidural rather than
                                  management            PCA (see p. C-3).                       a PCA regimen is superior in patients undergoing
                                                                                                major abdominal surgery. In high-risk patients with
                                                                                                pulmonary impairment an epidural regimen may re-
                                                                                                duce the incidence of respiratory failure. The use of
                                                                                                epidural (or systemic) local anesthetic can speed up
                                                                                                bowel recovery and reduce hospital length of stay.
                                                                                                The improvement of other major clinical outcomes
                                                                                                (e.g., cardiovascular) has not yet been demonstrated
                                                                                                convincingly in patients undergoing nonvascular
                                                                                                abdominal surgery.

                                Tests                   CXR, if CVP placed perioperatively
                                                        CBC

===== PAGE 645 =====
Splenectomy        645

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Angst MS, Ramaswamy B, Riley ET, et al: Lumbar epidural morphine in humans and supraspinal analgesia to experimental
                        heat pain. Anesthesiology 2000; 92:312–24.
                     2. Bell RF, Dahl JB, Moore RA, et al: Perioperative ketamine for acute postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006:
                        CD004603.
                     3. Brown CJ, Buie WD: Perioperative stress dose steroids: do they make a difference? J Am Coll Surg 2001; 193:678–86.
                     4. Clarke H, Bonin RP, Orser BA, et al: The prevention of chronic postsurgical pain using gabapentin and pregabalin: a combined
                        systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 2012; 115:428–42.
                     5. Ginosar Y, Columb MO, Cohen SE, et al: The site of action of epidural fentanyl infusions in the presence of local anesthetics:
                        a minimum local analgesic concentration infusion study in nulliparous labor. Anesth Analg 2003; 97:1439–45.
                     6. Jorgensen H, Wetterslev J, Moiniche S, et al: Epidural local anesthetics versus opioid-based analgesic regimens on postoperative
                        gastrointestinal paralysis, PONV and pain after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000: CDO01893.
                     7. Macario A, Royal MA: A literature review of randomized clinical trials of intravenous acetaminophen (paracetamol) for acute
                        postoperative pain. Pain Pract 2011; 11:290–6.
                     8. Maund E, McDaid C, Rice S, et al: Paracetamol and selective and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the
                        reduction in morphine-related side-effects after major surgery: a systematic review. BR J Anaesth 2011; 106:292–7.
                     9. Nisanevich V, Felsenstein I, Almogy G, et al: Effect of intraoperative fluid management on outcome after intraabdominal
                        surgery. Anesthesiology 2005; 103:25–32.
                    10. Rigg JR, Jamrozik K, Myles PS, et al: Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia and outcome of major surgery: a randomised trial.
                        Lancet 2002; 359:1276–82.
                    11. Swenson BR, Gottschalk A, Wells LT, et al: Intravenous lidocane is as effective as epidural bupivacaine in reducing ileus
                        duration, hospital stay, and pain after open colon resection: a randomized clinical trial. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010;
                        35:370–6.
                    12. White R, Winston C, Gonen M, et al: Current utility of staging laparoscopy for pancreatic and peripancreatic neoplasms.
                        J Am Coll Surg 2008; 206:445–50.

                                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                   SPLENECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Through a midline abdominal or left subcostal incision or laparoscopically, the spleen is mobilized by
                   dividing the lateral peritoneal attachments while the spleen is retracted medially. (Relevant anatomy is shown in Fig.
                   7.9-2.) Once the spleen is delivered into the operative wound, the short gastric vessels are clamped, cut, and ligated.
                   This can be done with the Ligasure device. The splenic artery and vein are then exposed with care being taken not to
                   injure the tail of the pancreas. By keeping the splenic hilum between the operator’s fingers and thumb, inadvertent
                   bleeding can be controlled easily. Accessory spleens (incidence, 15–30%) also should be looked for if the splenectomy
                   is being done for ITP. They are found along the cephalad and caudad edges of the pancreas behind the stomach and in
                   the area of the gastrohepatic ligament, greater omentum, and the splenic hilum. All patients undergoing splenectomy
                   should receive polyvalent pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenza vaccines. Children may also require vaccina-
                   tion against meningococcus.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Following trauma, efforts at splenic salvage (splenorrhaphy) may be made,
                   if possible, to preserve all or part of the spleen. This may be accomplished by the use of local hemostatic techniques
                   (electrocoagulation, argon beam coagulator, Surgicel or Gelfoam soaked in thrombin, microfibrillar collagen, and the
                   use of fine sutures or mattress sutures with Teflon felt pledgets). Recently, splenectomy has been performed laparo-
                   scopically if the spleen is near normal size (see Laparoscopic Splenectomy, p. 595).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Staging laparotomy results; trauma; immune thrombocytopenic purpura; hereditary
                   spherocytosis; other hereditary hemolytic anemia types; or a variety of myeloproliferative disorders

===== PAGE 646 =====
General Surgery   646   c h a p t e r 7.9     Peritoneal Surgery

                                            Figure 7.9-2. Anatomic relation of the spleen to the liver, diaphragm, pancreas,
                                            colon, and kidney. The stomach is sectioned to illustrate the anatomic relations in
                                            situ. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT,
                                            et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                            Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                          Splenectomy                                              Splenorrhaphy

                                 Position                 Supine                                                   ⇐

                                 Incision                 Midline or left subcostal                                ⇐

                                 Special                  Suitable abdominal retractors                            ⇐
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   Potential for major blood loss during procedure; avoid   ⇐
                                   considerations         splenic laceration and damage to tail of pancreas.

                                 Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv                                       ⇐

                                 VTE prophylaxis          Heparin 5000 units sq                                    ⇐

                                 Surgical time            1–2 h                                                    1–2 h

===== PAGE 647 =====
Excision of Intraabdominal, Retroperitoneal Tumors            647

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                             Splenectomy                                                Splenorrhaphy

                     Closing                 Adequate hemostasis                                        ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                     50–100 mL                                                  200–500 mL

                     Postop care             ± NG decompression; PACU (nontrauma)                       ⇐

                     Mortality               0–3%                                                       ⇐

                     Morbidity               Thrombocytosis: > 1,000,000 → VTE                          ⇐
                                             Pulmonary complications: 3–23%
                                             Pancreatitis and/or pancreatic fistula: 1–8%
                                             Subphrenic abscess: 0–6%
                                             Bleeding: 1–5%
                                             Overwhelming sepsis: 0.3–2%

                     Pain score              5–7                                                        5–7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Any age

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               Common

                     Etiology                See Usual preop diagnosis, above.

                     Associated              Blood dyscrasia (30–50%); abdominal or thoracic trauma (25%); Hodgkin’s disease (5–10%);
                       conditions            tumors (5%)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Exploratory or Staging Laparotomy, p. 641.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Davidson RN, Wall RA: Prevention and management of infection in patients without a spleen. Clin Microbiol Infect 2001;
                        12:657–60.
                     2. Fraker DL: Splenic disorders. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery, Scientific
                        Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1222–50.
                     3. Nurden AT, Nurden P: Increasing the platelet count in chronic ITP. Lancet 2008; 371:362–4.

                   EXCISION OF INTRAABDOMINAL,
                   RETROPERITONEAL TUMORS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Intraabdominal and retroperitoneal tumors, other than those of visceral origin, consist primarily of
                   sarcomas (liposarcoma, fibrous histiocytomas, mesenteric fibromas, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors). They are
                   usually approached through a long midline incision for adequate exposure and to assess their resectability. Resection
                   of such lesions may require excision of adjacent or involved small bowel or large intestine or other involved abdominal
                   viscera. Care must be taken not to injure the ureters or major vessels, particularly at the root of the mesentery to the
                   small bowel. It may be prudent to have ureteral stents placed to avoid injury to the ureters. If residual microscopic

===== PAGE 648 =====
648   c h a p t e r 7.9     Peritoneal Surgery

                                tumor remains, intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) may be indicated. In certain tumors, the patient may still
                                benefit from “tumor debulking” (removing as much tumor as possible and treating the remaining tumor with radia-
                                tion and/or chemotherapy). Operative approaches are dictated by location of tumor. Although most operative ap-
                                proaches are transabdominal, some retroperitoneal tumors may be approached retroperitoneally via oblique incision
                                on either side of the abdomen. Some require thoracoabdominal incisions.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Intraabdominal or peritoneal tumor

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                  Supine

                                 Incision                  Midline abdominal or transverse

                                 Unique                    Availability of blood
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics               Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv preop

                                 VTE prophylaxis           Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time             3–4 h

                                 Closing                   Hemostasis
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                       300–1000 mL
        General Surgery

                                 Mortality                 1–3%

                                 Morbidity                 Respiratory problems: 5–10%
                                                           Wound infection: 2–4%
                                                           Hemorrhage: 1–3%

                                 Pain score                8–10

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 Variable, 20–75 yr

                                 Male:Female               1:1
                                 Incidence
                                                           Common

                                 Etiology                  Unknown

                                 Associated                Partial bowel obstruction (10–15%); hydronephrosis (10–15%)
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Intestinal and Peritoneal Procedures, p. 534, and for Exploratory or Staging Lapa-
                                rotomy, p. 641.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Gholanai S, Jacobs CD, Kapp DS, et al: The value of surgery for retroperitoneal sarcoma. Sarcoma 2009; 2009:605840.
                                  2. Sabel MS: Sarcomas of bone and soft tissue. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery,
                                     Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 2151–76.
                                  3. Shukla PJ, Bareto SG, Shrikhande SV: Retroperitoneal sarcoma. Br J Surg 2007; 94:1057–8.

===== PAGE 649 =====
Drainage of Subphrenic Abscess         649

                   DRAINAGE OF SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Abscesses may occur in subphrenic spaces, including the right subphrenic, right subhepatic, left sub-
                   phrenic, lesser sac, or bare area of the liver (Fig. 7.9-3), following peritonitis, abdominal surgery or trauma. It is
                   important to know the anatomy of these spaces for making a correct diagnosis and for treatment. Most commonly
                   abscesses are drained by interventional radiology (85%), but some may require an open surgical approach.
                   Drainage is accomplished by a posterior or anterior extraperitoneal approach or by a transpleural approach,
                   depending on location of the abscess. Lesser sac abscesses are best approached by an anterior transperitoneal
                   route. Abscesses in the bare area of the liver are drained posteriorly. After the abscess is localized, the cavity is
                   entered by finger dissection and drained. Loculations are broken up and the cavity thoroughly irrigated with NS
                   or a suitable antibiotic solution. Appropriate drains are placed, and the wound is closed in a conventional manner.
                   Cultures are routinely obtained.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Percutaneous approaches have become more popular as experience is
                   gained by interventional radiologists. This technique should be reserved for unilocular collections, where sterile
                   cavities are not penetrated and a safe route is available.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Subphrenic abscess

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                       Subphrenic
                                         abscess

                                                                                                         Subphrenic
                                                                                                         abscess

                                        Subhepatic
                                          abscess                                                     Spleen
                                                                                                      Sp

                                                                                                          Drain
                                         Drains

                               Figure 7.9-3. Anatomy of subphrenic abscess. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, Vol. I. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                               Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 650 =====
650   c h a p t e r 7.9    Peritoneal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                         Subphrenic Abscess Drainage                       Percutaneous Approach

                                 Position                Supine or lateral decubitus, right or left        ⇐

                                 Incision                Subcostal or oblique abdominal                    None

                                 Special                 Drainage tubes                                    Special catheters; CT guidance
                                   instrumentation

                                 Antibiotics             Zosyn (Piperacillin & Tazobactam) 3.375 g q 6 h   ⇐

                                 VTE prophylaxis         Heparin 5000 units sq                             ⇐

                                 Surgical time           1–1½ h                                            ⇐

                                 EBL                     50–100 mL                                         10–25 mL

                                 Postop care             Maintain patency of the drainage tubes            ⇐

                                 Mortality               < 5%                                              ⇐

                                 Morbidity               Inadequate drainage: 5–10%                        ⇐
                                                         Pulmonary complications: 5–10%
                                                         Bowel perforation: < 2%

                                 Pain score              7–9                                               4–5
        General Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Variable, 15–80 yr

                                 Male:Female             1:1

                                 Incidence               Common

                                 Etiology                Postop (70–80%); peritonitis (25–30%); trauma (5–10%)

                                 Associated              See Etiology, above.
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Intestinal and Peritoneal Procedures, p. 534.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 1075–80.
                                  2. Doherty GM, Way LW: Peritoneal cavity. In: Doherty GM, ed. Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment, 12th edition.
                                     McGraw-Hill, New York: 2005, 493–507.
                                  3. Goulet CJ: Endoscopic transgastric drainage of subphrenic abscess. Gastrointest Endosc 2007; 65:733–5.

===== PAGE 651 =====
Inguinal Herniorrhaphy     651

                   INGUINAL HERNIORRHAPHY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Groin hernias are defects in the transverse abdominis layer, where a direct hernia comes through the
                   posterior wall of the inguinal canal and an indirect hernia comes through the internal inguinal ring (Fig. 7.9-4). Di-
                   rect hernias are medial to the inferior epigastric artery and vein, whereas indirect hernias are lateral to these vessels.
                   Surgical approach can be either anterior or posterior. In general, an anterior approach (Bassini, McVay’s, Shouldice,
                   or mesh repair) is used for primary repair of an indirect or direct inguinal hernia. The Bassini repair consists of liga-
                   tion of the hernia sac and suturing the conjoint tendon to the shelving edge of Poupart’s ligament. McVay’s repair
                   sutures the conjoint tendon to Cooper’s ligament and usually is reserved for femoral inguinal hernias. Shouldice
                   emphasizes the closing of the transverse fascia and transversus abdominal muscle layers. Currently, the interpos-
                   ing of Marlex mesh or insertion of a Marlex plug between the conjoint tendon, the internal oblique muscle, and the
                   inguinal ligament is commonly used. Mesh is associated with improved outcomes and less pain. Other modifications
                   are indicated in special situations.
                   A posterior approach is used by some surgeons for the repair of femoral hernias and recurrent inguinal hernias and
                   for treating incarcerated and strangulated hernias. The posterior preperitoneal approach is normally performed
                   by suturing the transversus abdominis arch on the superior aspect of the hernia defect to Cooper’s ligament and the
                   iliopubic tract on the inferior aspect of the defect.
                   The laparoscopic approach is indicated for the repair of recurrent or bilateral inguinal hernias and utilizes a
                   preperitoneal patch repair and results in less postop pain and an earlier return to normal physical activity (see

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Repair, p. 609). Randomized studies suggest that laparoscopic repair has lesser results.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Groin pain or lump

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Oblique or transverse

                     Unique                  Avoid damage to nerve structure and spermatic cord. Avoid interfering with blood supply to
                       considerations        testes.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv preop

                     Surgical time           1–1.5 h

                     Postop care             PACU → room

                     EBL                     25–50 mL

                     Mortality               3/100,000

                     Morbidity               Wound abscess: < 3%
                                             Wound hematoma: < 2%

                     Pain score              4–5

===== PAGE 652 =====
General Surgery   652   c h a p t e r 7.9     Peritoneal Surgery

                                            Figure 7.9-4. Inguinal anatomy. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-Conner
                                            CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                            Philadelphia: 2003.)

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 1–90 yr

                                 Male:Female               85:15

                                 Incidence                 15/1000

                                 Etiology                  Congenital variants; reduced collagen synthesis in adults

                                 Associated                Chronic cough; urinary retention; chronic constipation
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Abdominal Dehiscence, p. 656.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Gray SH, Hawn MT, Itani KM: Surgical progress in inguinal and ventral hernia repair. Surg Clin North Am 2008; 88:17–26.
                                  2. Hallen M, Bergenfelz A, Westerdahl J: Laparoscopic extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair versus open mesh repair: long-
                                     term follow-up of a randomized control trial. Surgery 2008; 143:313–7.
                                  3. Javid PJ, Brooks DC: Hernias. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley JS, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 11th edition. McGraw-Hill,
                                     New York: 2007, 105–40.
                                  4. Neumayer L, Giobbie-Hurden A, Jonasson O, et al: Open mesh versus laparoscopic mesh repair of inguinal hernia. N Engl J
                                     Med 2004; 350:1819.
                                  5. Richards AT, Quinn TH, Fitzgibbons RJ: Abdominal wall hernias. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, et al,
                                     eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006,
                                     1172–209.
                                  6. Suzuki S, Furui S, Okinaga K, et al: Differentiation of femoral vs inguinal hernia: CT findings. AJR 2007; 189:78–83.

===== PAGE 653 =====
Femoral Herniorrhaphy        653

                   FEMORAL HERNIORRHAPHY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The hernia sac is exposed as it exits the preperitoneal space through the femoral canal (Fig. 7.9-5). If
                   the hernia cannot be reduced, the possibility of strangulation needs to be kept in mind. The peritoneal sac in most
                   cases should be opened proximal to the femoral canal to gain control of the intestine before it reduces itself into the
                   peritoneal cavity. If the bowel is ischemic, it may require resection. The repair consists of suturing the iliopubic tract
                   to Cooper’s ligament, taking care not to compromise the femoral vein (McVay repair).
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Bulging of tissues over femoral canal

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Oblique

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           1–1.5 h

                     EBL                     25–50 mL

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                     Postop care             PACU → ward

                     Mortality               < 1% (6–20%, if strangulated)

                     Morbidity               Recurrence: 6%

                     Pain score              5–6

                                Figure 7.9-5. Femoral hernia repair. (Reproduced with permission from Scott-
                                Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003.)

===== PAGE 654 =====
654   c h a p t e r 7.9     Peritoneal Surgery

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 Adults; rare in children

                                 Male:Female               1:4

                                 Incidence                 1.5% of all groin hernias

                                 Etiology                  Failure of preformed peritoneal sac to obliterate; muscle atrophy in older age group

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Abdominal Dehiscence, p. 656.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Javid PJ, Brooks DC: Hernias. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley JS, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 11th edition. McGraw-Hill,
                                     New York: 2007, 105–40.
                                  2. Richards AT, Quinn TH, Fitzgibbons RJ: Abdominal wall hernias. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, et al,
                                     eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006,
                                     1172–209.
                                  3. Suzuki S, Furui S, Okinaga K, et al: Differentiation of femoral vs inguinal hernia: CT findings. AJR 2007; 189:78–83.
        General Surgery

                                REPAIR OF INCISIONAL HERNIA
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Incisional hernias can occur after any abdominal incision, but are most common following midline
                                incisions. Factors leading to herniation are wound infection, trauma, inadequate suturing, and ischemia. Following
                                skin incision, the skin edges and subcutaneous fat are retracted and the dissection is carried down to the hernia
                                defect. The redundant hernia sac is excised and the fascia is freed up on both sides of the wound. Primary closure is
                                preferred, if possible.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: In addition to primary repair, the latter may be reinforced by an onlay mesh
                                prosthesis, or the prosthesis may be used to fill the hernial defect or placed behind the muscle layer. In the repair of
                                incisional hernias, laparoscopic tacking of mesh is gaining in popularity.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Incisional hernia

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                  Supine

                                 Incision                  Vertical or transverse

                                 Special                   Mesh prosthesis (when indicated)
                                   instrumentation

                                 Antibiotics               Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv

                                 VTE prophylaxis           Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time             1–2 h

                                 Closing                   Retention sutures
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                       100–200 mL

===== PAGE 655 =====
Repair of Abdominal Dehiscence             655

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Postop care              ± NG decompression; abdominal binder; PACU → ward

                     Mortality                < 1%

                     Morbidity                Ileus: 5–10%
                                              Respiratory complications: 5–10%
                                              Wound infection: 1–2%

                     Pain score               5–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                20–70 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                3–5% of midline abdominal incisions

                     Etiology                 Wound infection; trauma; inadequate suturing; weak tissues

                     Associated               Obesity; malnutrition
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                 General Surgery
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Repair of Abdominal Dehiscence, p. 656.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Condon RE: Ventral abdominal hernia. In: Baker RJ, Fischer JE, eds. Mastery of Surgery, Vol II, 4th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001, 1983–8.
                     2. Gray SH, Hawn MT, Itani KM: Surgical progress in inguinal and ventral hernia repair. Surg Clin North Am 2008; 88:17–26.
                     3. Javid PJ, Brooks DC: Hernias. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley JS, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 11th edition. McGraw-Hill,
                        New York: 2007, 105–40.
                     4. Richards AT, Quinn TH, Fitzgibbons RJ: Abdominal wall hernias. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, et al,
                        eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006,
                        1172–209.

                   REPAIR OF ABDOMINAL DEHISCENCE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Dehiscence implies a “splitting apart” or “bursting open” of the abdominal wall fascia. A complete
                   dehiscence is a separation of all layers of the abdominal wall and often is associated with an extrusion of abdominal
                   viscera. If incomplete, the separation of fascial and muscular layers results in an incisional hernia or an obstruction
                   of a herniated loop of intestine. The earliest sign of a wound dehiscence is the presence of serosanguineous drain-
                   age from the wound. Minimal disruptions may be treated conservatively with occlusive dressings and an abdominal
                   binder. Major dehiscence requires operative repair using careful fascial closure and retention sutures.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Variations in the type of closure depend on surgeon’s preference. Interrupted,
                   nonabsorbable sutures and skin bridges are often used.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Wound dehiscence

===== PAGE 656 =====
656   c h a p t e r 7.9   Peritoneal Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position               Supine

                                 Incision               Closure of previous incision

                                 Unique                 Adequate muscle relaxation essential
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics            Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv

                                 VTE prophylaxis        Heparin 5000 units sq

                                 Surgical time          1–2 h

                                 EBL                    50–100 mL

                                 Postop care            Abdominal binder to relieve tension on suture line; PACU → ward

                                 Mortality              5–10%

                                 Morbidity              Recurrent incisional hernia: 5–10%
                                                        Wound infection: < 5%
                                                        Wound ischemia: 1–2%

                                 Pain score             4–5

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
        General Surgery

                                 Age range              25–90 yr

                                 Male:Female            1:1

                                 Incidence              1.3% in patients < 45 yr
                                                        5.4% in patients > 45 yr

                                 Etiology               Wound infection; excessive coughing or sneezing; excessive abdominal distention; weak tissue;
                                                        poor nutrition; hematoma formation; poor surgical technique with tissue ischemia

                                 Associated             Malnutrition (25–30%); ascites (20–25%); hypoproteinemia (20%); chronic anemia (5–10%);
                                   conditions           vitamin C deficiency (< 5%)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                (Procedures covered: inguinal herniorrhaphy; femoral herniorrhaphy; incisional hernia repair; repair of
                                abdominal dehiscence)

                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Predisposing factors for hernia often include increased abdominal pressure 2° chronic cough, bladder outlet
                                obstruction, constipation, pregnancy, vomiting, ↑ BMI, and acute or chronic muscular effort. These factors should
                                ideally be managed preop to avoid postop recurrence. The patient population may range from premature infants to
                                the elderly, who have the potential for presenting with multiple medical problems.

                                Musculoskeletal          Pain is likely to be present in area of hernia; evaluate bony landmarks if regional anesthesia
                                                         is planned.

                                Gastrointestinal         Hernias may become incarcerated, obstructed, or strangulated, requiring emergency sur-
                                                         gery. Fluid and electrolyte imbalance is likely.
                                                         Tests: Electrolytes, if indicated from H&P

                                Hematologic              For regional anesthesia, 3 patient’s coagulation status, if indicated from H&P.
                                                         Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 657 =====
Repair of Abdominal Dehiscence         657

                    Laboratory             Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication          If necessary, standard premedication (see p. B-1).

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA, regional, or local anesthesia ± iv sedation (MAC) may all be appropriate anesthetic
                   techniques for uncomplicated cases (e.g., without incarceration or obstruction). GA and epidural for postop pain
                   control may be appropriate for patients with unusually large incisional hernias or abdominal dehiscence (see An-
                   esthetic Considerations for Exploratory or Staging Laparotomy p. 641). Choice depends on factors such as site of
                   incision, patient physical status, and preference of both patient and surgeon. Profound muscle relaxation may be
                   necessary to facilitate exploration and repair.
                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Spinal                 Single-shot vs. continuous: Patient in sitting or lateral decubitus position (operative site
                                           down) for placement of hyperbaric subarachnoid block. Doses of local anesthetics are
                                           as follows for T4–T6 level: 0.75% bupivacaine in 8.25% dextrose (10–15 mg); 0.5% tetra-
                                           caine in 5% dextrose (12–16 mg). Consider adding fentanyl (10–20 mcg) and/or morphine
                                           (100–200 mcg).

                    Epidural               Patient in sitting or lateral decubitus position for placement of epidural catheter. After
                                           locating the epidural space, administer a test dose (e.g., 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                           1:200,000 epinephrine) to determine whether the catheter is subarachnoid or intravascular.
                                           Titrate local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine or ropivacaine) until desired
                                           surgical level is obtained (5–7 mL at a time), usually about 20 mL. Consider adding fentanyl
                                           (25–100 mcg). Consider adding single-shot morphine (3–5 mg) rather than fentanyl if the
                                           epidural catheter is removed shortly after the end of surgery (prolonged duration of action;
                                           requires monitoring for 16–24 h after injection).

                    Local                  Requires gentle surgical technique. Surgical field block, plus ilioinguinal and iliohypogas-
                                           tric nerve blocks, using 0.5% bupivacaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine. Usually performed
                                           by surgeon.

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction              LMA vs. ETT: Standard induction (see p. B-2). LMA may be suitable for the patient who
                                           presents with a simple chronic hernia. If there is obstruction, incarceration, or strangula-
                                           tion, however, a rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-6) with ET intubation is indicated.
                                           GETA also may be indicated in the patient with wound dehiscence and large incisional
                                           hernias.

                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxants may be necessary to facilitate surgical
                                           repair.

                    Emergence              Consider extubating the trachea while patient is still anesthetized to prevent coughing and
                                           straining. Patients who are at risk for pulmonary aspiration and require awake intubation
                                           or rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) are not candidates for deep extubation.

                    Blood and fluid        Minimal blood loss
                       requirements        IV: 16–18 ga × 1
                                           NS/LR @ 2–4 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring             Standard monitoring (see p. B-2).

                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points
                                           3 eyes

                    Complications          ↓↓ HR + ↓ BP                            Vagal reflex evoked by bowel traction.

===== PAGE 658 =====
658   c h a p t e r 7.9     Peritoneal Surgery

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications              PDPH after neuraxial block
                                  (cont’d)                 Urinary retention, common with            Patients with urinary retention may require
                                                             regional anesthesia                     catheterization
                                                           Wound dehiscence with coughing/
                                                             straining

                                Pain                       PO analgesics: acetaminophen and          Surgical field block or regional anesthesia should
                                  management               codeine (Tylenol #3 1–2 tab q 4–6 h)      provide sufficient analgesia postop.
                                                           or acetaminophen and oxycodone
                                                           (Percocet 1 tab q 6 h)

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Abbott DE, Dumanian GA, Halverson AL: Management of laparotomy wound dehiscence. Am Surg 2007; 73:1224–7.
                                  2. Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, eds: Neural Blockade Pain Management, 4th edition. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia:
                                     2008.
        General Surgery

===== PAGE 659 =====
c h a p t e r

                          7.10 Breast Surgery

                                        surgeons
                                        Irene L. Wapnir, MD, FACS
                                        Stefanie S. Jeffrey, MD, FACS

                                        anesthesiologist
                                        Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD

===== PAGE 660 =====
BREAST BIOPSY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Breast biopsy, or lumpectomy, is the surgical removal of breast tissue for histopathological exami-
                                nation. Many biopsies are done percutaneously as office procedures. These include fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
                                cytology and core needle biopsy. Needle biopsy may also be done under image guidance with breast ultrasound,
                                mammography, or breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) if lesions are not palpable. Open breast biopsies are
                                performed primarily in the OR for palpable or nonpalpable abnormalities. Palpable lesions include masses, nod-
                                ules, or areas of asymmetric breast thickening. Breast pathology can manifest as skin changes—specifically, edema,
                                redness, brawny discoloration, or ulceration—mandating biopsy of the involved skin and underlying breast tissue.
                                The term excisional biopsy is usually applied to benign entities and implies the complete removal of the lesion in
                                question (e.g., excision of a fibroadenoma). The term lumpectomy is used to characterize cancerous lesions that are
                                removed with a rim of normal breast tissue to achieve tumor-free margins.
                                Another reason for excisional biopsy is the occurrence of bloody or pathological nipple discharge. The underlying cause
                                of this abnormality is, in most instances, a benign intraductal papilloma or, infrequently, carcinoma. Ductoscopy may be
                                used to explore breast ducts that produce abnormal discharge fluid. The ductoscope is a 0.9-mm fiberoptic microendo-
                                scope. It is inserted into the duct(s) following progressive dilatation with lacrimal probes. After the intraductal lesion is
                                visually identified, the surgeon injects methylene blue to further guide the duct excision and breast biopsy.
                                Nonpalpable lesions are usually discovered on routine screening mammography or on diagnostic workup using breast
                                ultrasound or breast MRI. Microcalcifications, masses, densities, and architectural distortion fall into the category
        General Surgery

                                of potentially malignant lesions. Breast ultrasound can identify complex cystic or solid masses, and MRI can show
                                areas of abnormal vascular enhancement. In these instances, the breast usually feels and looks normal. Typically, the
                                radiologist places one or more percutaneous hookwires in close proximity to the lesion, using local anesthesia. Later,
                                in the operating room, the surgeon then uses the hookwire(s) as an anatomical guide to locate and excise the area of
                                abnormality. These procedures are referred to as wire-localization breast biopsies or lumpectomies. In the OR,
                                the surgeon removes the breast tissue surrounding the wire and confirms the removal of the wire and target lesion
                                on specimen radiography and/or ultrasound. Bracket wire localization refers to placement of multiple hookwires
                                to mark the periphery of a larger lesion or multiple lesions so tissue can be removed between the bracketing wires.
                                Breast biopsies, or lumpectomies, may be performed under local field block or regional anesthesia including paraver-
                                tebral block combined with intravenous sedation/MAC or with GA. Factors influencing anesthetic technique include
                                size and location of the lesion, multiple lesions, trajectory of the guiding wires, patient preference, or concerns of
                                implant injury for patients who have subglandular implants.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Breast mass; nipple discharge; atypical hyperplasia; known in situ, or invasive cancer; mam-
                                mographic, sonographic, or MRI abnormalities

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Breast Biopsy/Lumpectomy                         Wire Localization Breast Biopsy

                                 Position                     Supine with ipsilateral arm abducted. Table      ⇐
                                                              may be banked to center breast.

                                 Incision                     Over the breast mass, circumareolar, along       ⇐ Incision may or may not incorporate skin
                                                              the inframammary fold or radial                  entry site of wire.

                                 Special instrumentation      Ductoscope; ultrasound                           ⇐

                                 Antibiotics                  Cefazolin 1 g iv (optional)                      ⇐

                                 Surgical time                0.5–1.5 h                                        1–1.5 h

                                 Closing considerations       Steri-Strips™ or transparent dressing            ⇐ + specimen radiograph result must be
                                                              (Tegaderm™, Opsite™), covered by gauze          obtained before completion of operation.

                                 EBL                          < 25 mL                                          ⇐

                          660

===== PAGE 661 =====
Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy          661

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                              Breast Biopsy/Lumpectomy                         Wire Localization Breast Biopsy

                     Postop care              PACU → home                                      ⇐

                     Mortality                Minimal                                          ⇐

                     Morbidity                Seroma: very common                              ⇐
                                              Ecchymosis or hematoma: < 10%                    ⇐
                                              Infection: 1–2%                                  ⇐
                                                                                               Wire transected; Target lesion is missed (may
                                                                                               be due to misplacement or dislodging of wire)

                     Pain score               2–5                                              2–5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                > 15 yr                                          25–90 yr

                     Male:Female              Mainly female                                    ⇐

                     Incidence                Common                                           ⇐

                     Etiology                 Unknown                                          ⇐

                                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Breast Biopsy and Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy, p. 663.

                   SENTINEL LYMPH NODE BIOPSY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Sentinel lymph node biopsy is a technique applied to patients with invasive breast cancers who do
                   not have clinically pathologic lymph nodes. The sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first node to drain afferent lym-
                   phatics from the particular region of the breast where the cancer is located and is commonly located in the axilla
                   but may be situated in the internal mammary chain or other extraaxillary sites. Because the SLN is the first lymph
                   node to drain lymphatics from a breast cancer, it is the most likely lymph node to harbor metastatic tumor cells. The
                   absence of metastasis on histological examination of SLN predicts tumor-free status of nonsentinel lymph nodes,
                   and this approach avoids conventional Level I and II axillary lymph node dissection in node-negative patients. The
                   technique has been validated in institutional and multicenter studies and in prospective randomized trials.
                   Two types of agents have been principally tested for lymphatic mapping and sentinel node identification procedures:
                   vital blue dyes (1% isosulfan blue or methylene blue) and 99m-technetium-labeled sulfur colloid (TSC; unfiltered or
                    filtered). Methylene blue can be used in lieu of isosulfan blue. Different injection sites of these agents may be used: peri-
                    tumoral or around biopsy cavity, periareolar/subareolar, or in combination. The first method instills 3–5 mL of isosulfan
                    blue subareolar or at 3, 6, 9, and 12 o’clock surrounding the lesion. The breast is massaged, and the axilla is incised 3–7
                    min later, inferior to the hair-bearing area a few cms inferior to the axillary skin fold, depending on the distance of the
                    tumor to the axilla. Typically, blue afferent lymphatics and blue nodes are identified below the clavipectoral fascia. The
                    surgeon should inform the anesthesiologist when injecting the dye because a transient drop in the pulse oximeter read-
                    ing of 2–5% is frequently seen, with maximal drop occurring within 20–25 min after injection. This is artifactual due to
                    effects of blue dye spectral absorption, and blood oxygen remains normal. Patients’ skin may retain a bluish hue, and
                    the urine, stool, or emesis can be blue for up to 24 h (the patient needs to be advised of this prior to discharge). Allergic
                   reactions consisting of “blue hives” to full-blown, life-threatening anaphylaxis have been reported following the injection
                    of isosulfan blue dye. Methylene blue has a lower incidence of allergic reactions, but can cause skin necrosis if injected
                    undiluted intradermally.

===== PAGE 662 =====
662   c h a p t e r 7.10    Breast Surgery

                                                                                          Sentinel lymph nodes can also be identified using TSC (~1–2
                                                                                          mCi). This agent is usually injected in the nuclear medicine
                                                                                          department the day of or the day before the operative procedure.
                                                                                          The tracer has very low radioactivity, and no special protection
                                                                                          is required around the patient or in handling tissue specimens.
                                                                                          Postinjection lymphoscintigraphy is considered optional.
                                                                                          After induction of GA or regional anesthesia, the operative field
                                                                                          (chest and lymph node-bearing areas) is surveyed with a hand-
                                                                                          held gamma probe (a slim rod, similar to a Geiger counter). The
                                                                                          “hot” spot(s), denoting accumulated tracer in lymph nodes, are
                                                                                          identified, and an incision is made in the overlying skin. It was
                                                                                          previously customary to have a pathologist examine the senti-
                                                                                          nel node intraop using touch-prep cytology or frozen section to
                                                                                          identify node-positive cases for proceeding with standard axil-
                                                                                          lary dissection during the course of the same operation. More
                                                                                          recent studies suggest that patients with clinically negative but
                                                                                          1–2 histologically positive sentinel lymph nodes do not have
                                                                                          worse outcome if axillary lymph node dissection is omitted.
                                                                                          Combination of blue dye and TSC yields the highest sentinel
                                                                                          node identification rates. Whenever the sentinel node cannot
                                                                                          be identified, a conventional axillary dissection should be per-
                                Figure 7.10-1. Arm may be draped into                     formed. Failure to identify sentinel node either by palpation or
                                field and positioned on arm board at 90° or               above-described techniques mandates proceeding with a stan-
        General Surgery

                                suspended over head, as shown. Incision site              dard level I and II axillary lymph node dissection. Limiting
                                for lymph node biopsy is indicated by dotted              axillary lymph node dissections is now valid for patients with
                                line. (Reproduced with permission from Baker              two or fewer positive sentinel nodes, provided the patient will
                                RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 6th edition.          be treated with postoperative whole breast or regional radiation
                                Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.)                     therapy. Completion axillary dissection is performed in mas-
                                                                                          tectomy-treated patients with positive sentinel lymph nodes.
                                                                                          Usual preop diagnosis: Invasive breast cancer

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                   Supine

                                 Incision                   Small transverse or curvilinear axillary incision

                                 Special instrumentation    Handheld gamma-detection probe

                                 Unique considerations      Avoid BP cuff or iv in ipsilateral arm. Possible need to avoid muscle relaxants. Isosulfan
                                                            blue vital dye → allergic reaction (1–2/100). Methylene blue can cause skin necrosis when
                                                            injected intradermally but does not cause anaphylaxis.

                                 Antibiotics                Cefazolin 1 g iv (optional)

                                 Surgical time              10–30 min, up to 1.5 h for axillary lymph node dissections

                                 EBL                        Minimal

                                 Postop care                PACU → home

                                 Mortality                  Rare

                                 Morbidity                  Discoloration of urine and stool up to 48 h (usually gone by 24 hours)
                                                            Permanent tattooing of skin with blue dye
                                                            Transient blue staining of skin
                                                            Allergic reaction to dye or radioisotope: ~1–2%
                                                            Anaphylaxis: 1/2000

                                 Pain score                 2–5

===== PAGE 663 =====
Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy        663

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              > 25 yr

                     Incidence              ~1/8 American women will develop breast cancer.

                     Etiology               Unknown in most cases; familial history may be related to genetic mutation (BRCA l & 2).

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR BREAST BIOPSY AND
                         SENTINEL LYMPH NODE BIOPSY
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Breast masses may vary in size and depth, which will, in part, determine what type of anesthetic is most suitable for
                   the procedure in these frequently healthy patients. Excisional biopsies can usually be usually accomplished with iv
                   sedation and local anesthesia; however, patient wishes must be considered in the anesthetic plan. The suitability of
                   local/MAC versus GA is best addressed by preoperative discussion with the surgical team. A paravertebral block
                   may be considered for more extensive breast tissue excisions and when a separate incision is made for lymph node
                   removal (see Anesthetic Technique for Mastectomy section, p. 666).

                    Psychosocial            Patients are likely to be anxious concerning the possibility of breast cancer and should be
                                            supported and premedicated appropriately.

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                    Laboratory              As indicated from H&P. No testing may be appropriate.

                    Premedication           Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA or local anesthesia + iv sedation are both appropriate techniques. Choice of anesthetic
                   technique depends on the size and depth of lesion and the wishes of the patient. Surgery is typically done on an
                   outpatient basis.

                    MAC                     Propofol infusion (25–100 mcg/kg/min), combination of analgesics (e.g., fentanyl/
                                            remifentanil) and anxiolytics (e.g., midazolam), titrated to effect, are most commonly used.
                                            Adding Na bicarbonate to 1% lidocaine (1:10) will reduce injection pain. The anesthesiolo-
                                            gist may give remifentanil 0.5–1 mcg/kg 90 sec before initial injection of local anesthetic
                                            into the skin.

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2). Mask or LMA anesthetic may be appropriate.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxants are not necessary for surgical
                                            procedure.

                    Emergence               No special considerations

                    Blood and fluid          Minimal blood loss
                       requirements          IV: 20 ga × 1
                                             NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          Other monitors as clinically indicated. Isosulfan blue
                                             If MAC, then monitor adequacy of         vital dye → artifactual ↓ O2 sat as low as 92–94%.
                                                ventilation and depth of sedation.

                    Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                            3 eyes

===== PAGE 664 =====
664   c h a p t e r 7.10      Breast Surgery

                                Complications               Inadequate analgesia                       May have to supplement surgical field block with
                                                                                                       local anesthetic or convert to GA.
                                                            Isosulfan dye reaction                     Pruritus, localized swelling, blue hives. Rx:
                                                                                                       diphenhydramine (10–50 mg iv). ↓ BP may require
                                                                                                        epinephrine.

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               No specific complications                  Inform patients that urine, emesis, or stool may be
                                                            anticipated.                               blue for 24–48 h.

                                Pain                        PO analgesics (see p. C-3)
                                  management

                                Tests                       As clinically indicated.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Dooley WC: Routine operative breast endoscopy for bloody nipple discharge. Ann Surg Oncol 2002; 9(9):920–3.
                                  2. Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, et al, eds: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th edition. Springer-Verlag, New York: 2010.
                                  3. Freire AR, White PF: Monitored anesthesia care. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia, 6th edition. Churchill Livingstone, New York:
                                     2005, 2609–11.
        General Surgery

                                  4. Guiliano AE, Hunt KK, Ballman KV, et al: Axillary dissection vs no axillary dissection in women with invasive breast cancer
                                     and sentinel node metastasis randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2011; 305(6):569–75.
                                  5. Krag DN, Anderson SJ, Julian TB, et al: Technical outcomes of sentinel-lymph node resection and conventional axillary lymph
                                     node dissection in patients with clinically node negative breast cancer: results from the NSABP B-32 randomised phase III
                                     trial. Lancet Oncol 2007; 8(10):881–8.
                                  6. Kuerer HM, ed: Kuerer’s Breast Surgical Oncology. McGraw-Hill Professional, New York: 2010.
                                  7. Thevarajah S, Huston TL, Simmons RM: A comparison of the adverse reactions associated with isosulfan blue versus
                                     methylene blue dye in sentinel lymph node biopsy for breast cancer. Am J Surg 2005; 189(2):236–39.
                                  8. Vokach-Brodsky L, Jeffrey SS, Lemmens HJM, et al: Isosulfan blue affects pulse oximetry. Anesthesiology 2000; 93:102–3.
                                  9. Wilke LG, McCall LM, Posther KE, et al: Surgical complications associated with sentinel lymph node biopsy: results from a
                                     prospective international group trial. Ann Surg Oncol 2006; 13(4):491–500.

                                BREAST-CONSERVING SURGERY AND MASTECTOMY
                                ± RECONSTRUCTION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: The treatment of invasive breast cancer has evolved greatly in the last 35 years. Modified radical
                                mastectomy refers to removal of the breast and the axillary lymph nodes; total mastectomy with sentinel lymph
                                 node biopsy refers to removal of the breast and the sentinel lymph node(s); and lumpectomy (partial mastectomy)
                                 and sentinel lymph node biopsy or axillary lymph node dissection refers to removal of the cancer in the breast with a
                                 tumor-free margin and the sentinel lymph node(s) or a more complete axillary lymph node dissection, as indicated. All
                                 offer equivalent survival for operable, earlier-stage breast cancer. Lymphatic mapping with sentinel lymph node biopsy
                                 is used in women with clinically negative lymph nodes. Modified radical mastectomy is performed through a single
                                 elliptical incision, whereas lumpectomy and sentinel lymph node, or axillary lymph node dissection, are normally done
                                 through separate incisions. Postop adjuvant radiation therapy is routinely recommended in breast-conserving surgery
                                 and is administered following the completion of adjuvant chemotherapy. For in situ breast cancer, lymphatic map-
                                 ping and sentinel node biopsy are generally not done with the exception of large or high grade DCIS or in select cases
                                 undergoing mastectomy. Newer accelerated and partial radiation techniques are being integrated into breast care,
                                 including the insertion of brachytherapy balloons during surgery or administering a single dose of intraop radiation.

===== PAGE 665 =====
Breast-Conserving Surgery and Mastectomy ± Reconstruction             665

                   In an axillary dissection, Levels I and II lymph nodes are removed. These nodes lie behind and lateral to the edge
                   of the pectoralis minor muscle. The Level III, or highest group of axillary lymph nodes, are medial to the pectoralis
                   minor muscle and are not routinely removed unless clinically involved. As part of the axillary dissection, the surgeon
                   preserves the thoracodorsal nerve (innervates the latissimus dorsi muscle) and the long thoracic nerve (innervates
                   the serratus anterior muscle), as well as the blood and nerve supply to the pectoral muscles. The intercostobrachial
                   nerves (sensory to the upper arm) course through the axillary contents and its preservation usually can be accom-
                   plished, avoiding the occurrence of permanent dysesthesias. Reverse arm lymphatic mapping may be used selectively
                   in patients undergoing lymphadenectomy in an effort to preserve arm lymphatics and prevent lymphedema. Typi-
                   cally, 3–5 mL of isosulfan blue is injected intradermally and subcutaneously into the upper arm, which is then mas-
                   saged for five minutes to enhance drainage.
                   A total mastectomy (also known as a simple mastectomy) removes only breast tissue. It is done mainly for treat-
                   ment of extensive duct carcinoma in situ or for prophylaxis in high-risk patients. Total mastectomy may be combined
                   with sentinel lymph node biopsy for treatment of early-stage breast cancer in clinically node-negative patients. Skin-
                   sparing or nipple-sparing mastectomies are being increasingly performed to improve cosmesis of breast reconstruc-
                   tion. During the mastectomy, the surgeon typically preserves the entire skin envelope, commonly lengthening the
                   duration of the operation. Ischemic skin flaps are a big concern, and techniques such as infrared camera imaging of
                   perfusion using iv indocyanin green may be used. Indocyanin green should be avoided in patients with iodine allergies.
                   Immediate breast reconstruction is an option for most women undergoing mastectomy. Postop chest radiation may
                   be a relative, but not absolute, contraindication to immediate reconstruction. Two approaches are commonly used:
                   (a) prosthetic reconstruction with a temporary tissue expander or a saline-filled implant placed behind the pectoral
                   muscles and (b) autologous myocutaneous flaps (see Breast Reconstruction, p. 1153). Truly excellent cosmetic re-
                   sults are possible with mastectomy techniques that preserve much of the breast skin (skin-sparing, areolar-sparing,

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                   or nipple-sparing mastectomies). The latter are usually performed through smaller incisions therefore requiring more
                   operative time. Patients who carry BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations are at risk for developing breast and ovarian
                   cancer and may choose to undergo prophylactic bilateral mastectomies, which also lengthens operative duration.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Invasive or in situ breast cancer, high-risk patients (e.g., genetic susceptibility to breast
                   cancer; family history of breast cancer)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                                  Lumpectomy, Axillary
                                            Modified Radical Mastectomy                 Total Mastectomy          Lymph Node Dissection

                     Position               Supine with ipsilateral arm abducted and    ⇐                         ⇐
                                            may be prepped on field. Avoid brachial
                                            plexus stretch. Repositioning may be re-
                                            quired (latissimus dorsi reconstruction).

                     Incision               Elliptical oblique or elliptical trans-     ⇐                         Incision over breast mass or
                                            verse to include nipple/areola and                                    previous biopsy site. Sepa-
                                            previous biopsy; periareolar, or                                      rate transverse or oblique
                                            “tennis-racquet.”                                                     incision in axilla.

                     Unique                 Avoid iv and BP cuff on ipsilateral arm;    ⇐                         ⇐
                       considerations       many surgeons prefer no paralytics
                                            during axillary portion of surgery

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv (optional)                 ⇐                         ⇐

                     Surgical time          1.5–3 h (+ 1–7 h, if immediate breast       1–2 h (+ 1–7 h, if im-    1–3 h
                                            reconstruction performed); longer for       mediate breast recon-
                                            bilateral surgery                           struction performed)

                     Closing                Gauze bandage over incision                 ⇐                         ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                    150–500 mL, depending on whether            ⇐                         25–100 mL
                                            scalpel or electrocautery is used.

                     Postop care            PACU → 2 d hospitalization                  PACU → 1–2 d hospi-       PACU → home
                                                                                        talization or occasion-
                                                                                        ally → home

===== PAGE 666 =====
666   c h a p t e r 7.10    Breast Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                                                                                             Lumpectomy, Axillary
                                                        Modified Radical Mastectomy               Total Mastectomy           Lymph Node Dissection

                                 Mortality              Rare                                      ⇐                          ⇐

                                 Morbidity              Lymphedema: 5–30% (depending on           ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           extent of axillary dissection)
                                                        Seroma: 25%                               ⇐                          ⇐
                                                        Infection: 2–10%                          ⇐                          ⇐
                                                        Flap necrosis: < 5%                       ⇐
                                                        Hematoma: < 5%                            ⇐                          < 10%
                                                        Injury to axillary neurovascular
                                                           structures: Rare
                                                        Pneumothorax: Rare (may occur with        ⇐                          ⇐
                                                           attempts to obtain hemostasis of
                                                           intercostal perforating vessels)

                                 Pain score             4–8                                       4–6                        4–8

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range              20–90 yr (generally > 40 yr)

                                 Incidence              Over their lifetime, ~1/8 of American women develop breast cancer. In 2013, according to American
        General Surgery

                                                        Cancer Society it is estimated, there will be 232,340 new cases of invasive breast cancers in women
                                                        and 2240 in men; there are also expected to be 64,640 new cases of carcinomas in situ.

                                 Etiology               Unknown in most cases; about 5–10% of female breast cancers and 4–40% of male breast can-
                                                        cers may be related to a gene such as BRCA1 and BRCA2.

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients often have no other coexisting medical problems. Consider implications of advanced disease including met-
                                astatic spread to lung, brain, liver, and bone, and related debility.

                                Respiratory              Respiratory compromise can be present if patient has received XRT to the thorax as part
                                                         of treatment.
                                                         Tests: Consider CXR if pulmonary Sx or signs of disease present. Others as indicated by
                                                         H&P.

                                Cardiovascular           Chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., doxorubicin at doses > 550 mg/m2) may cause significant
                                                         cardiomyopathies.
                                                         Tests: ECG if > age 60 or if cardiac disease or Sx present. Review any relevant cardiac stud-
                                                         ies. Consider echo if cardiomyopathy or HF Sx’s present.

                                Neurological             Breast cancer may metastasize to the CNS and can present with focal neurologic deficits,
                                                         ↑ ICP, or altered mental status.
                                                         Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Hematologic              Look for anemia and thrombocytopenia following chemotherapy.
                                                         Tests: CBC, with differential and Plt count

                                Laboratory               Other as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

===== PAGE 667 =====
Breast-Conserving Surgery and Mastectomy ± Reconstruction               667

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or GA with LMA. Regional anesthesia (paravertebral block [PVB]) in breast surgery
                   is associated with less PONV, less postop pain, earlier discharge from the hospital, and less chronic incisional pain.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2)

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). The use of muscle relaxants during axillary dissection
                                             should be avoided to permit surgical identification of nerves by nerve stimulator or if elec-
                                             trocautery is used in the axilla.

                    Emergence                Pressure dressings may be applied with the patient anesthetized and “sitting up” at the end of
                                             the procedure. Discuss with surgeons whether they intend to apply this type of dressing, to
                                             enable appropriate timing of emergence. Consider PONV prophylaxis (see p. B-6).

                   Regional anesthesia: Unilateral multiple-level PVB provides satisfactory anesthesia for modified radical mastec-
                   tomy and lumpectomy with axillary lymph node dissection. A block from T1-T6 is required. Suitable local anesthet-
                   ics (4–5 mL/level) are 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropivacaine with 1:400,000 epinephrine. Sedation is useful during
                   block placement and is continued intraop. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Breast Biopsy, p. 663.) PVB is contra-
                   indicated for the following reasons: (a) patient refusal, (b) local anesthetic allergy, (c) pathology or previous surgery
                   → anatomic distortion of paravertebral space, and/or (d) infection at sites of injection.

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                    Blood and fluid          Minimal-to-moderate blood loss
                       requirements          IV: 16–18 ga × 1 (avoid operative
                                             side)
                                             NS/LR @ 3–5 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          Others as indicated by patient status. BP cuff on
                                                                                      arm opposite surgical site or on leg.

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                             3 eyes

                    Complications            Pneumothorax                             Deep surgical exploration may cause inadvertent
                                                                                      pneumothorax; monitor patient for Sx (e.g., ↑ PIP, ↓
                                                                                      PaCO2, asymmetric breath sounds, hemodynamic
                                                                                      instability). Dx: CXR. Rx: Chest tube and ↑ FiO2.

                    Complications 2°         Inadequate block (10%)
                      PVB                    Pleural puncture
                                             Pneumothorax
                                             Horner’s syndrome
                                             Inadvertent epidural spread of local anesthetic

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Pneumothorax                             If index of suspicion for pneumothorax is high,
                                             Psychological trauma                     maintain oxygenation (100% FiO2) and ventila-
                                             PONV (see p. B-6)                         tion; inform surgeons of the likelihood of the Dx. If
                                                                                      patient is hemodynamically stable and not hypox-
                                                                                       emic, a portable CXR may aid in diagnosis.

                    Pain                     PCA (see p. C-3)
                      management             PO analgesics (see p. C-3)

                    Tests                    Postop portable CXR, if pneumothorax is suspected.

===== PAGE 668 =====
668   c h a p t e r 7.10     Breast Surgery

                                Suggested Readings
                                 1. Alander JT, Kaartinen I, Laakso A, et al: A review of indocyanine green fluorescent imaging in surgery. Int J Biomed Imaging
                                    2012; 940585.
                                 2. Boneti C, Badgwell B, Robertson Y, et al: Axillary reverse mapping (ARM): initial results of phase II trial in preventing
                                    lymphedema after lymphadenectomy. Minerva Ginecol 2012; 64(5):421–30.
                                 3. Boneti C, Yuen J, Santiago C, et al: Oncologic safety of nipple skin—sparing or total skin-sparing mastectomies with
                                    immediate reconstruction. J Am Coll Surg 2011; 212(4):686–93; discussion:693–5.
                                 4. Greengrass RA, Duclas R: Paravertebral blocks. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 50(1):56–73.
                                 5. Kairaluoma P, Bachmann M, Rosenberg P, et al: Preincisional paravertebral block reduces the prevalence of chronic pain after
                                    breast surgery. Anesth Analg 2006; 103(3):703–8.
                                 6. Peled AW, Foster RD, Stover AC, et al: Outcomes after total skin—sparing mastectomy and immediate reconstruction in 657
                                    breasts. Ann Surg Oncol 2012; 19(11):3402–9.
        General Surgery

===== PAGE 669 =====
c h a p t e r

                          7.11 Endocrine
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Julia Park, MD
                                           Dana T. Lin, MD
                                           Ralph S. Greco, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Sara Nikravan, MD
                                           Frederick G. Mihm, MD

===== PAGE 670 =====
EXCISION OF THYROGLOSSAL DUCT CYST
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Thyroglossal duct cysts typically are located in the midline at or below the hyoid bone (Fig. 7.11-1).
                                Differential diagnoses after initial physical exam include epidermoid cysts or lymph nodes. Cysts should be removed
                                because of an associated high risk of infection with oral flora and a slight (< 1%) risk of either squamous-cell or
                                papillary-thyroid cancer developing in the cyst itself. A transverse skin incision is made over the cyst, and if the cyst
                                was previously infected and sinus tracts through the skin are present, the skin should be removed along with the cyst.
                                The cyst is identified and followed cephalad to the hyoid bone (Fig. 7.11-2). Then, the midportion of the hyoid bone
                                is resected to minimize recurrence. There may be many small tracts associated with the cyst that tend to attenuate
                                beyond the hyoid bone. The base of the tract or tracts is resected up to the level of the floor of the mouth at the fora-
                                men cecum and ligated with absorbable suture (Sistrunk procedure). The wound is irrigated copiously and closed
                                in layers. The wings of the hyoid bone are not reapproximated.

                                Usual preop diagnosis: Thyroglossal duct cyst
        General Surgery

                                            Figure 7.11-1. Location of thyroglossal duct cysts. (Reproduced with permission from
                                            Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles
                                            and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine, with neck in hyperextended position

                                 Incision                 Transverse skin incision

                                 Unique                   Surgeon may request assistance, by placing finger at base of tongue to identify the cephalad
                                   considerations         extent of the needed dissection.

                                 Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time            1–1.5 h

                                 Closing                  Careful hemostasis. Coughing may be associated with venous congestion and hematoma
                                   considerations         formation.

                                 EBL                      5–10 mL

                          670

===== PAGE 671 =====
Excision of Thyroglossal Duct Cyst   671

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Mortality               < 0.1%

                     Morbidity               Bleeding: < 5%
                                             Infection: < 5%

                     Pain score              3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               6 mo–30 yr (40% present at < 10 yr)

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               ~ 1:3000

                     Etiology                Persistence of undifferentiated epithelial cells in area of hyoid bone that later become
                                             squamous-cell epithelium or glandular tissue

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                                                                 A

                                                         Hyoid

                                                         Cyst

                                                                 B

                                Figure 7.11-2. Thyroglossal duct cyst excision. A: Incision placed over presenting
                                cyst; no skin excised. B: Cyst has been dissected from surrounding tissues, and hyoid
                                is exposed after division of sternohyoid and thyrohyoid muscles at insertion. The bone
                                is encircled with a short right-angle clamp 1 cm from its midpoint, where it is divided
                                with a bone cutter or cautery. (Reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE:
                                Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 672 =====
672   c h a p t e r 7.11     Endocrine Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Thyroidectomy, p. 674.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Gauger PG: Thyroid gland. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery, Scientific
                                     Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1289–309.
                                  2. Organ GM, Organ CH: Thyroid gland and surgery of the thyroglossal duct: exercise in applied embryology. World J Surg
                                     2000; 24(8):886–90.
                                  3. Tracy TF Jr, Muratore CS: Management of common head and neck masses. Semin Pediatr Surg 2007; 16(1):3–13.

                                THYROIDECTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Thyroidectomy is performed through a transverse neck incision (Fig. 7.11-3), usually 6–8 cm long. In the
                                traditional approach, the platysma muscle is divided sharply and subplatysmal flaps are developed superiorly and
                                inferiorly. The two large anterior jugular veins must be avoided and are occasionally a source of blood loss, a lthough
                                rarely of any hemodynamic significance. Once the flaps are adequately developed, a spring or self-retaining retractor
        General Surgery

                                may be placed to expose the midline prethyroid fascia (median raphe). This is divided in the midline to expose the
                                strap muscles, which can then be separated from the thyroid gland.
                                After the thyroid gland is exposed, resection can proceed. Resection may be total, subtotal (lobe + isthmus ± partial
                                remaining lobe), or lobar. Degree of resection depends on diagnosis and may be modified based on operative find-
                                ings. During this portion of the operation, hemostasis is critical to maintain adequate visualization. Resection of
                                a lobe usually begins with ligation and division of the middle thyroid vein along the midlateral aspect of the gland
                                (Fig. 7.11-4).
                                The superior pole is mobilized by controlling and dividing the superior thyroid vessels close to the thyroid capsule
                                to avoid injury to the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve. As the dissection proceeds, care is taken to
                                identify and preserve the superior and inferior parathyroid glands. The lobe is retracted medially to expose the

                                          Figure 7.11-3. Transverse incision at base of neck for thyroidectomy. (Reproduced
                                          with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott
                                          Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 673 =====
Thyroidectomy       673

                                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                               Figure 7.11-4. Vascular relationships to the thyroid gland. (Reproduced with
                               permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery:
                               Scientific Principles and Practice. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)
                               Inset shows patient positioning with neck extended.

                   tracheoesophageal groove. The recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) is then visualized and traced along its entire course.
                   Its function may be confirmed using a nerve monitor. The gland is gently dissected away from the nerve and then
                   mobilized off the trachea to complete the resection. Any enlarged or suspicious lymph nodes are also excised and
                   sent for pathologic examination. Before closing, hemostasis is ensured and can be tested with a Valsalva maneuver.
                   The midline fascia and platysma are closed using absorbable suture and the skin with a running monofilament suture.
                   The use of drains remains controversial and has not been shown to decrease the rate of hematoma formation.
                   Minimally invasive techniques, such as video-assisted mini-incision or remote-access thyroidectomy via an endoscop-
                   ic or robotic approach, have been described but have not gained widespread use. Video-assisted thyroidectomy has been
                   shown to have similar rates of cure with superior voice preservation, improved cosmesis, shortened hospitalizations, and
                   faster patient recovery when compared with conventional open surgery. Remote-access procedures have utilized various
                   entry sites to reach the thyroid, namely, the anterior chest wall, breast, axilla, and post-auricular area through a facelift
                   incision. Remote-access surgery avoids the presence of a cervical scar altogether while offering enhanced visualization
                   and dexterity as well as comparable postoperative outcomes. Limitations that have prevented widespread adoption of
                   these minimally invasive approaches include narrow patient selection criteria (based on the nature, size, and extent of
                   thyroid pathology as well as body habitus), surgeon inexperience, lengthy operative time, and greater cost.
                   Intraoperative nerve monitoring (IONM) is increasingly being used as an adjunct to identify, dissect, and confirm
                   the function of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Specialized endotracheal tubes are inserted with surface electrodes
                   contacting the luminal surface of the vocal cords on either side. The electrodes are connected to a monitoring device
                   that continually senses EMG activity of the thyroarytenoid muscles. When the surgeon stimulates the RLN using
                   a probe wired to the monitor, the device detects the electrical impulse from the vocal cords and sounds an audible
                   alert, as well as a visual signal in some systems.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: FNA findings of definite/suspicious/inconclusive for malignancy; goiter; thyroid cancer
                   (papillary, follicular, medullary, anaplastic); thyroid nodule; hyperthyroidism; Graves’ disease

===== PAGE 674 =====
674   c h a p t e r 7.11    Endocrine Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine with head elevated to 30° and neck extended (see Fig. 7.11-4, inset)

                                 Incision                Transverse cervical

                                 Unique                  Patients with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism are at ↑ risk for developing thyroid storm d
                                                                                                                                                uring
                                   considerations        surgery. Hyperthyroidism may be controlled preop with either ß-adrenergic blockade or
                                                         propylthiouracil. Preop iatrogenic hypothyroidism may be associated with ↓ BP and circulatory
                                                         collapse during induction of anesthesia.

                                 Antibiotics             None routinely used

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h

                                 Closing                 Adequate hemostasis; minimize coughing
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                     50–75 mL

                                 Postop care              Observe for postop respiratory problems 2° recurrent laryngeal nerve injury (bilateral), hema-
                                                          toma, or ↓ Ca++. Admit × 24 h. 3 Ca++ the night of surgery and the following a.m. Same-day
                                                         surgery remains controversial 2° delayed discovery of hematoma (16 h) and hypocalcemia.

                                 Mortality               < 0.5%

                                 Morbidity               Hypoparathyroidism (↓ Ca+ +): 3–5%
                                                         Hematoma: 1–2%
        General Surgery

                                                         Thyroid storm (usually in association with Graves’ disease)
                                                         Wound infection: 0.2–0.5%
                                                         Recurrent laryngeal nerve damage
                                                            Unilateral (hoarseness): 0.77%
                                                            Bilateral (aphonia, respiratory obstruction): 0.39%

                                 Pain score              3–4

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               15–80 yr

                                 Male:Female             Overall: 1:8
                                                         Cancer: papillary (1:2); follicular (1:3); medullary; anaplastic; lymphoma (1:1)

                                 Incidence               Cancer (uncommon)
                                                         Benign (relatively common)

                                 Etiology                Cancer (50%): papillary (80%); follicular (10%); medullary (5%); anaplastic (1%); lymphoma (1%)
                                                         Benign lesions (50%): nontoxic goiter (20%); thyrotoxicosis (10%); thyroiditis (5%); benign nod-
                                                         ules (5%); other (10%)

                                 Associated              Other endocrine disorders (e.g., pheochromocytoma in association with medullary thyroid carci-
                                   conditions            noma in patients with MEN 2A and 2B)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                (Procedures covered: excision of thyroglossal duct cyst; thyroidectomy)

                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                Hyperthyroidism may be 2° Graves’ disease (common), toxic multinodular goiter, thyroid adenomas, TSH-secreting
                                tumor (rare), or overdosage of thyroid hormone. Common Sx are fatigue, sweating, intolerance to heat, ↑ appetite,
                                ↑ HR, ↑ BP, ↑ pulse pressure, ↑ T, weight loss or gain, thyroid goiter, and exophthalmos. Some older patients exhibit
                                apathetic thyrotoxicosis, which is often mistaken for hypothyroidism. CHF and AF are common with these patients.
                                Hypothyroidism may be iatrogenic or 2° autoimmune thyroiditis. Common Sx are intolerance to cold, anorexia,
                                fatigue, weight gain or loss, constipation, ↓ HR, ↓ pulse pressure, ↓ DTR, ↓ T, ↓ mentation. An important aspect of

===== PAGE 675 =====
Thyroidectomy       675

                   the preop visit is to ensure that the patient is in a physiologically euthyroid state (✓ T, HR, pulse pressure, reflexes).
                   Patients presenting for thyroidectomy usually are made euthyroid before surgery and may be taking one or more of
                   the following medications: propylthiouracil, methimazole, potassium iodide, glucocorticoids, or ß-blockers.

                   General: Although cases have been reported describing total thyroidectomy for noneuthyroid patients with wors-
                   ening cardiac function who have failed aggressive medical therapy (J Laryngol Otol 2012 July; 126(7):701–5).

                    Respiratory               Beware of tracheal compression with large goiters, → tracheal deviation, stridor.
                                              Tests: CXR; consider preop CT scan of neck to evaluate possible tracheal involvement,
                                              especially in patients with large goiters.

                    Endocrine                                              T4           T3ru         T3                   TSH
                                              Hyperthyroid                 ↑            ↑            ↑                    Normal or ↓
                                              1° hypothyroid               ↓            ↓            ↓ or normal          ↑
                                              2° hypothyroid               ↓            ↓            ↓                    ↓

                                              Tests: Thyroid function; Ca++; Mg++; phosphate; alkaline phosphatase; glucose

                   Hyperthyroidism:

                    Respiratory               ↑ BMR → ↑ VO2 → rapid desaturation on induction.

                    Cardiovascular            ↑ HR, AF (10–40% incidence), palpitations, CHF. A normal resting HR is helpful in
                                              determining whether the patient is ready for surgery. If the situation calls for it (e.g., emer-
                                               gency surgery), the patient can be treated with ß-blockers to blunt the sympathomimetic

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                                               effects of the hyperthyroid state. ß-blocker therapy can be problematic in patients with
                                               CHF (titrate while monitoring filling pressures and CO).
                                               Tests: ECG; consider preoperative ECHO for evaluation of LV function.

                    Neurological              Warm, moist skin, nervousness, anxiety (may require generous sedation), tremor, ↑ DTRs.

                    Musculoskeletal           Higher incidence of myasthenia gravis and skeletal muscle weakness (↑ sensitivity to mus-
                                              cle relaxants), clubbing of the fingers, weight loss, myopathy
                                              Tests: CK, urine myoglobin, BMP

                    Hematologic               Mild anemia, thrombocytopenia
                                              Tests: CBC

                    Gastrointestinal          Weight loss and diarrhea
                                              Tests: BMP + others as indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             Midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Continue antithyroid medications preop. Hyperthyroid patients
                                              must be made euthyroid before elective surgery and may be on the following drugs: pro-
                                              pylthiouracil, methimazole, potassium iodide, ß-blockers, and glucocorticoids.

                    Thyroid storm               A life-threatening exacerbation of hyperthyroidism occurring during periods of stress,
                                                which is manifested by hyperthermia (> 40°C), tachycardia, widened pulse pressure, anxiety,
                                                altered mental state → psychosis → coma, and myopathy (rhabdomyolysis in 50%; severe
                                                in 4%). (Thyroid storm has been mistaken intraop for malignant hyperthermia, sepsis,
                                                anaphylaxis, and other hypermetabolic reactions, e.g., neuroleptic malignant syndrome.)
                                                Thyroid storm is most often associated with Graves’ disease that has been incompletely
                                                treated prior to surgery. General Rx: ↑ FiO2; fluid resuscitation; electrolyte replace-
                                              ment/correction (↑ Ca++); cooling blankets; acetaminophen; maintain diuresis (maintain
                                              e uvolemia) if rhabdomyolysis; treat precipitating event (infection, CHF, DKA, pregnancy).
                                                Specific Rx: propylthiouracil (block synthesis) (200–250 mg po q 4 h); sodium iodide
                                                (block release; 1–2.5 g iv); steroids (mechanism unclear)—hydrocortisone (100 mg iv q
                                                8 h), or dexamethasone (4 mg iv q 24 h); ß-blockers (use with caution in patients with reac-
                                                tive airway disease, AV block, or CHF)—propranolol (20–120 mg po q h or 0.25–1.0 mg
                                                iv q 5 min), and/or esmolol (50–300 mcg/kg/min). Note: Block synthesis BEFORE (1 h is
                                                adequate) giving iodides to block release, otherwise “iodine escape” will occur later.

===== PAGE 676 =====
676   c h a p t e r 7.11     Endocrine Surgery

                                Hypothyroidism:

                                Respiratory               Beware of tracheal compression with large goiters → tracheal deviation, stridor.
                                                          ↓ ventilatory response to ↑ CO2 and ↓ O2 (caution with opioids and sedatives).
                                                          Tests: CXR; consider preop CT scan of neck to evaluate possible tracheal involvement,
                                                          especially in patients with large goiters.

                                Cardiovascular            Bradydysrhythmias, diastolic HTN, pericardial effusions, ECG → ↓ voltage, ST-T wave D’s,
                                                          ↑ QT, occasional VT (torsades de pointe—pause-dependent). This type of VT is treated
                                                          with MgSO4, cardioversion; then isoproterenol or pacing to shorten QT. Thyroid replace-
                                                          ment must be weighed against the risk of precipitating myocardial ischemia in patients
                                                          with known CAD. Diastolic dysfunction, ↓ LV compliance → cautious volume expansion.
                                                          Tests: ECG; consider preoperative ECHO for evaluation of LV systolic/diastolic function,
                                                          pericardial effusion/tamponade.

                                Endocrine                 Addison’s disease occurs in 5–10% of patients with severe hypothyroidism; some patients may
                                                          receive a “stress dose” of steroids (hydrocortisone 100 mg iv q 8 h × 3) in the periop period.
                                                          Tests: Cortisol stimulation test

                                Neurological              ↓ BMR → slow mentation and movement, cold intolerance, ↓ reflexes with “hangup”
                                                          (delayed relaxation phase)

                                Musculoskeletal           Arthralgias and myalgias

                                Renal                     Impaired renal function 2° amyloidosis, urinary retention, oliguria. (50% incidence of ↓ Na+)
                                                          Tests: Consider BUN; Cr; Na+.
        General Surgery

                                Hematologic               Coagulation abnormalities, anemia
                                                          Tests: CBC

                                Gastrointestinal          GI bleeding, constipation, ileus
                                                          Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Laboratory                Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication             Midazolam 1–2 mg iv. (None in the patient who is clinically hypothyroid and requires
                                                          emergent surgery.) Hypothyroid patients can safely undergo anesthesia/surgery if they
                                                          have mild-to-moderate disease. Clinically hypothyroid patients (↓ HR, ↓ T, ↓ pulse pres-
                                                          sure, ↓ DTRs) should be given thyroid replacement before elective surgery.

                                Myxedema                    Severe hypothyroidism constituting a medical emergency, with mortality of > 50%.
                                  comma                     Manifestations include stupor or coma, hypothermia (which correlates inversely with
                                                            mortality), hypoventilation with hypoxemia, bradycardia (HR 50–60), hypotension, apathy,
                                                          hoarseness, and hyponatremia. Supportive measures: early intubation and mechanical
                                                          v entilation; treat ↓ BP with cautious volume expansion (risk of pulmonary edema), ino-
                                                             tropes (risk of arrhythmias), pacing (carefully, 60–70 b/min) and r/o pericardial effusion,
                                                             passive rewarming only, especially if ↓ BP (active warming for T < 30°C); correct ↓ Na+
                                                          carefully (risk of Central Pontine Myelinolysis); correct ↓ glucose. Specific Rx: L-thyroxine
                                                          (T4; 200–500 mcg iv loading dose, 100–300 mcg iv the next day); or tri-iodothyronine (T3;
                                                          20–50 mcg iv q 6–12 h); hydrocortisone (100–300 mg iv q d). T4 onset is slow (6 h after iv
                                                          administration) and has to be converted peripherally (slowed in hypothyroid state) to bio-
                                                          logically active T3. Also, T4 may be converted in some critically ill patients to biologically
                                                          inactive rT3 (“reverse T3”). ↓ TSH level is the earliest sign of response.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: Normally, GETA; infrequently, under local anesthesia. If using IONM, insert the specialized
                                endotracheal tube, preferably with the aid of a video laryngoscope, and ensure direct contact of the electrodes with the
                                vocal cords on either side. A short-acting, nondepolarizing paralytic may be given to allow for full relaxation during
                                intubation; however, long-acting neuromuscular blocking agents should be avoided. For inadequately treated hyper-
                                thyroid patients, it is important to establish an adequate depth of anesthesia to prevent an exaggerated sympathetic

===== PAGE 677 =====
Thyroidectomy         677

                   response to surgical stimulation. Avoid agents that stimulate the sympathetic nervous system (e.g., ketamine, pan-
                   curonium, meperidine). Hypothyroidism may be associated with ↑ sensitivity to anesthetic agents and muscle
                   relaxants.

                    Induction               Standard induction for euthyroid patients (p. B-3). If the patient has airway compromise
                                            2° a large thyroid goiter, consider an awake fiberoptic intubation (p. B-6). If using IONM,
                                            intubation via a video laryngoscope allows for both anesthesiologist and surgeon to visual-
                                            ize and confirm the position of the ETT electrodes in relation to the vocal cords.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Maintain muscle relaxation, except if using IONM (avoid
                                            paralytic agents). Use nerve stimulation to guide relaxant dosing.

                    Emergence               Airway obstruction 2° recurrent laryngeal nerve damage, tracheomalacia (especially in
                                            patients with large destructive goiters), or hematoma can occur. Consider visualizing vocal
                                             cord function before extubation.

                    Blood and fluid         Minimal blood loss                     Slight head-up position can help make for a blood-
                                            IV: 18 ga × 1                          less surgical field without substantially increasing
                                            NS/LR @ 5–8 mL/kg/h                    the risk of VAE.
                                            Head-up position

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1).            + others as indicated by patient’s status (i.e., pul-
                                                                                   monary artery catheter in the setting of emergent
                                                                                   surgery in thyrotoxic patients with congestive heart
                                                                                   failure). Maintain normothermia, especially in

                                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                                                                                   hypothyroid patients.

                    Positioning             ✓ pad pressure points                  Supine, with head slightly hyperextended, allows for
                                            ✓ eyes                                 surgical exploration of the neck.

                    Complications           Cardiorespiratory depression           In hypothyroid patients, marked ↓ BP and ↓ RR
                                                                                   may occur with minimal anesthetic doses.

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications           Recurrent laryngeal nerve damage       Bilateral: patient will be unable to speak and will
                                                                                   require reintubation. CPAP may temporize situa-
                                                                                   tion and make reintubation less emergent. Unilat-
                                                                                   eral: characterized by hoarseness.
                                            Tracheomalacia or hematoma with        Acute airway obstruction may occur immediately
                                            airway compromise                      postop, and rapid reintubation may be lifesaving. If air-
                                                                                    way compromise is 2° hematoma, reopen incision and
                                                                                    drain remaining blood; if patient still requires artificial
                                                                                    airway, consider CPAP or awake reintubation.
                                            Acute hypoparathyroid state             Acute hypocalcemia can present as laryngeal stridor
                                            (hypocalcemia)                          (24–48 h postop), although it most often presents
                                                                                    with tingling in the fingertips and lips. If untreated
                                                                                    and severe, this can progress to tetany and seizures.
                                                                                    Administering 1 amp Ca++ gluconate given iv over
                                                                                    20 min usually alleviates symptoms. Rx: measure
                                                                                    Ca++; replace if necessary. CPAP is effective for air-
                                                                                    way compromise.
                                            Thyroid storm                           Can mimic MH (see Rx above).

                    Pain                    PCA hydromorphone or fentanyl
                      management            Oral narcotic analgesics

                    Tests                   Vocal cord function                    Ability to phonate “e” implies continued vocal cord
                                                                                   function.

===== PAGE 678 =====
678   c h a p t e r 7.11      Endocrine Surgery

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Abbas G, Dubner S, Heller KS: Re-operation for bleeding after thyroidectomy and parathyroidectomy. Head Neck 2001;
                                     23(7):544–6.
                                  2. Arora N, Dhar P, Fahey TJ III: Seminars: local and regional anesthesia for thyroid surgery. J Surg Oncol 2006; 94(8):
                                     708–13.
                                  3. Bhattacharyya N, Fried MP: Assessment of the morbidity and complications of total thyroidectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head
                                     Neck Surg 2002; 128(4):389–92.
                                  4. Fitzgibbons SC, Brams DM, Wei JP: The treatment of thyroid cancer. Am Surg 2008; 74(5):389–99.
                                  5. Gauger PG: Thyroid gland. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM et al, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific
                                     Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1289–311.
                                  6. Gaz, RD: Hyperthyroidism. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 7th edition. Mosby Inc, St. Louis: 2001, 653–7.
                                  7. Kearney T, Dang C: Diabetic and endocrine emergencies. Postgrad Med J 2007; 83(976):79–86.
                                  8. Lee C, Stack BC Jr: Intraoperative neuromonitoring during thyroidectomy. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2011; 11(9):1417–27.
                                  9. Linos D: Minimally invasive thyroidectomy: A comprehensive appraisal of existing techniques. Surgery 2011; 150(1):17–24.
                                 10. McHenry C: Thyroidectomy for nodules of small cancers. In: Duh QY, Clark OH, Kebebew E, eds. Atlas of Endocrine Surgical
                                     Techniques. Saunders: 2010, 3–24.
                                 11. Schwartz JJ, Rosenbaum SH: Anesthesia and the endocrine system. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical
                                     Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1129–51.
                                 12. Zeiger, MA: Nontoxic goiter. In: Cameron JL, eds. Current Surgical Therapy, 7th edition. Mosby Inc, St. Louis: 2001, 642–4.

                                PARATHYROIDECTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
        General Surgery

                                Description: The traditional approach for primary hyperparathyroidism requires four-gland visualization with
                                removal of any abnormally large glands. Newer methods of localization and confirmation of adenomas have ushered
                                 in an era of minimally invasive parathyroid surgery. Minimally invasive techniques involve a focused operative
                                 dissection via mini-incision, endoscopic, or robotic approach. Focused parathyroidectomy is aided by the preop
                                 localization studies, the mainstays of which are ultrasound and sestamibi scanning. If localization fails to identify
                                 the correct gland, then the minimally invasive approach is converted to the standard incision, and all four glands are
                                 explored until the diseased gland is identified.
                                For the standard open operation, an incision in the lower neck
                                (Fig. 7.11-5) is made, and the platysma is divided. Subplatysmal
                                flaps are created superiorly and inferiorly to allow for increased
                                working space and to expose the prethyroid fascia. The mid-
                                line between the strap muscles is opened, exposing the thyroid
                                gland. The superior parathyroids are located behind the upper
                                pole, which may be mobilized to reveal the parathyroid. The
                                inferior glands are located near the junction of the inferior thy-
                                roid artery and the recurrent laryngeal nerve (Fig. 7.11-6). He-
                                mostasis is crucial to maintain adequate visualization in the
                                surgical field. In the traditional approach, all four glands are
                                identified and biopsied for confirmation of parathyroid tissue.
                                Abnormal glands are removed. If four-gland hyperplasia is found,
                                which may occur with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1 or
                                2A, secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism, then either a 3.5-
                                gland parathyroidectomy or total parathyroidectomy with fore-
                                arm reimplantation is performed.
                                With preop imaging studies dissection may be limited to
                                the area of suspicion and the abnormal gland or glands
                                are removed. Successful resection is confirmed by observ-              Figure 7.11-5. Skin incision for parathyroid
                                ing a 50% decrease in or normalization of the parathor-                exploration, made 1–2 fingerbreadths superior
                                mone level 5–10 min after removal, as compared to preop                to sternal notch, as far lateral as the external
                                value. This very sensitive assay is rapidly becoming the               jugular veins on both sides. (Reproduced with
                                standard of care in the treatment of primary hyperpara-                permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery
                                thyroidism. The administration of preop methylene blue                 of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                or radioactive tracers may aid in localizing parathyroid               Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)
                                tissue. If the parathyroid adenoma cannot be found, the

===== PAGE 679 =====
Parathyroidectomy   679

                                Figure 7.11-6. Identification of upper parathyroid gland on right side. (Reproduced
                                with permission from Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL: Operative Anatomy, 2nd

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                                edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003).

                   surgeon should explore other areas of the neck, including the paraesophageal and retroesophageal space,
                   c arotid sheath, and thymus. Unilateral thyroid lobectomy may be performed when three normal glands have
                    been found and the fourth gland is missing, as the adenoma may be within the thyroid substance. Mediastinal
                    exploration should not be done on primary exploration.
                   Intraoperative nerve monitoring (IONM) can be used during parathyroid surgery to assist in identifying and
                   preserving the recurrent laryngeal nerves. IONM is particularly helpful in the reoperative setting for persis-
                   tent or recurrent hyperparathyroidism.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Variations of minimally invasive parathyroid surgery utilizing endoscopic
                   and robotic techniques have been described. Those involving a mini-incision in the neck include video-assisted and
                   totally endoscopic parathyroidectomy. “Scarless” remote-access endoscopic and robotic procedures via extracervical
                   sites are also being performed in select centers. Several studies have demonstrated similar morbidity and cure rates
                   between the video-assisted and traditional approach, with improved visualizations of neck structures, less postop
                   pain, and better cosmetic results. However, cost, lengthy operative time, and surgeon inexperience has limited wide
                   adoption of many of these techniques.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Primary hyperparathyroidism due to a single adenoma (most common, 85%), double
                   adenoma, hyperplasia, or carcinoma (very rare, < 1%); secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism in patients with a
                   history of renal failure.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine; shoulder roll; reverse Trendelenburg or 30° tilt; head rest (gel donut)

                     Incision               Transverse cervical (4–8 cm; see Fig. 7.11-5)

                     Unique                 Methylene blue (7.5 mg/kg in 500 mL of NS) may be administered in the preop holding area
                       considerations       30 min before surgery → spurious ↓ SpO2. Radioactive technetium sestamibi (20 mCi) may be
                                            administered 60–90 min before operation. Methylene blue and radioactive tracers may be used
                                            independently or simultaneously to aid in identification of parathyroid tissue.

                     Antibiotics            None routinely used

                     Surgical time          1–2 h

===== PAGE 680 =====
680   c h a p t e r 7.11    Endocrine Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                 Closing                Coughing may be associated with venous congestion and hematoma formation.
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                    25–50 mL

                                 Postop care            Monitor serum Ca++ (nl = 8.5–10.5 mg% total Ca; 1–1.3 mM ionized Ca++). Patients typically admit-
                                                        ted for 24 h observation to ✓ serum Ca++ levels and monitor for hematoma/airway compromise.

                                 Mortality              < 0.5%

                                 Morbidity              Hypocalcemia: < 15%
                                                        Hypoparathyroidism: < 5%
                                                        Hematoma: 1%
                                                        Infection: 1%
                                                        Recurrent laryngeal paralysis: < 1%

                                 Pain score             3–4

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range              Increases with age

                                 Male:Female            4:1
        General Surgery

                                 Incidence              50–100/100,000 (1.5/100 in elderly)

                                 Etiology               Single adenoma (85%); double adenoma (2–3%); hyperplasia (10–15%); cancer (< 1%)

                                 Associated             Bone disease (5–15%); duodenal ulcer (5–10%); renal calculi (60–70%); MEN-1 (parathyroid +
                                   conditions           hyperplasia + pituitary adenoma + pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor); MEN-2A (parathyroid hyper-
                                                        plasia + medullary thyroid cancer + pheochromocytoma); HTN (20–50%)

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                These patients typically present with hypercalcemia (hyperparathyroidism), which must be controlled before sur-
                                gery. Although 25–50% of cases are asymptomatic, many will present with a variety of Sx, including fatigue, muscle
                                weakness, depression, anorexia, nausea, constipation, abdominal and bone pain, HTN, renal stones, polydipsia,
                                muscle cramps, bronchospasm, and anxiety. Differential diagnosis for the hypercalcemic patient includes metastatic
                                disease, multiple myeloma, milk-alkali syndrome, vitamin D intoxication, sarcoidosis, hyperthyroidism, thiazide
                                diuretics, adrenal insufficiency, Paget’s disease, immobilization, or an exogenous parathyroid hormone-producing
                                tumor.

                                Respiratory              Hyperparathyroidism is associated with ↓ clearance of secretions from the tracheobron-
                                                         chial tree → postop atelectasis. Avoid respiratory or metabolic acidosis, which will ↑ the
                                                         free fraction of Ca++ → hypercalcemia (↑ BP, ↑ muscle weakness, ↑ HR).
                                                         Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Airway                   Hyperparathyroidism and thyroid nodules often times coexist. Being aware of their
                                                         presence, size, extension, and effect on the airway is crucial for airway management.
                                                         (Eur J Anaesthesiol 2008; 25(9):772–4).

                                Cardiovascular           HTN (usually resolves with treatment; if severe or episodic, r/o pheochromocytoma);
                                                         ECG may show tachycardia with ↓ PR and ↓ QT intervals. Patients may be hypovole-
                                                         mic (2° anorexia, N/V, and polyuria) and have ↑ sensitivity to digitalis + resistance to
                                                         catecholamines.

===== PAGE 681 =====
Parathyroidectomy        681

                    Cardiovascular           ↓ BP may result from polyuria → hypovolemia. Preop management includes correction
                      (cont’d)               of intravascular volume and electrolyte abnormalities. Preop treatment of hypercalcemia
                                            includes aggressive expansion of intravascular volume, followed by diuresis (maintain
                                            euvolemia), to ↑ renal Ca++ excretion, usually accomplished with iv NS, and then furo-
                                            semide. Calcium channel blockers (verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem) can be used. Hypo-
                                            phosphatemia can impair myocardial contractility and should be corrected; hemodialysis
                                            or peritoneal dialysis can be performed to lower dangerously elevated serum Ca++ levels.
                                            Mithramycin, calcitonin, bisphosphonates, cisplatin, or steroids are not useful for acute Rx
                                            of ↑ Ca++ (too slow).
                                            Tests: ECG; electrolytes; others as indicated from H&P

                    Neurological            Patient may present with seizures, hyporeflexia, mental status changes (somnolence,
                                            depression, memory loss, psychosis, coma), or peripheral neuropathy. Significant improve-
                                             ment often follows correction of hypercalcemia.

                    Musculoskeletal         These patients may have muscle atrophy and weakness, osteopenia, arthralgia, pathologic
                                            fractures (take care during laryngoscopy and positioning), osteitis fibrosa cystica. Response
                                            to NMBs may be enhanced 2° ↑ Ca++ → muscle weakness.

                    Hematologic             Patients also tend to be hypophosphatemic and may show signs of hemolysis, plt dysfunc-
                                            tion, impaired ventricular contractility, and leukocyte dysfunction.
                                            Tests: CBC with Plt count, PO4-2

                    Endocrine               Primary hyperparathyroidism is most commonly due to benign parathyroid adenoma
                                            (90%) or hyperplasia (9%) and rarely carcinoma. It may be associated with MEN syndrome.

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                                            MEN-1 consists of tumors of the pituitary, parathyroid, and pancreatic islets; MEN-2 is
                                            characterized by parathyroid tumors, medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma,
                                            and mucosal neuromas. *NB: Anesthetizing a patient with an unrecognized pheochro-
                                            mocytoma could result in a fatality.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Renal                   Patients may have renal dysfunction 2° nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, renal tubular dis-
                                            orders, and glomerular disorders. Polyuria 2° ↑ Ca++ → electrolyte disturbances.
                                            Tests: BMP, Mg++

                    Gastrointestinal        These patients may have constipation, anorexia, N/V, epigastric pain.

                    Laboratory              Symptoms not related as well to absolute Ca++ level but to rate of change. Serum Ca++
                                            < 12 mg/dL: likely asymptomatic; 12–14 mg/dL: mild symptoms; > 16 mg/dL: life-
                                            threatening. Albumin (↑ albumin by 1 g/dL will ↑ total serum Ca++ by 0.8 mg/dL); electro-
                                            lytes; Mg++; phosphate (usually low).

                    Premedication             All medications to lower hypercalcemia should be continued unless Ca++ levels have
                                            normalized. Often, this strategy includes a combination of hydration and diuresis to in-
                                            crease urinary secretion of calcium. If patient has been treated with steroids in the preop
                                            period, administer a stress dose (hydrocortisone 100 mg iv q 8 h × 24 h) before induction of
                                             anesthesia and continue into the early postop period. Standard premedications (p. B-1) are
                                              usually appropriate in this patient group, unless patient has mental status changes.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA, with head slightly hyperextended, allows for adequate exposure of the neck. Cervi-
                   cal plexus blocks may be appropriate in selected patients; however, phrenic nerve block → respiratory compromise.

                    Induction               Standard induction (p. B-2). If patient is clinically hypovolemic, restore intravascular volume
                                            before induction and titrate induction dose of sedative/hypnotic agents. If using IONM,
                                            insert specialized ETT (glidescope helpful) and ensure direct contact of the electrodes with
                                            the vocal cords on either side. A short-acting, nondepolarizing paralytic may be used to
                                             facilitate intubation; however, long-acting neuromuscular blocking agents should be avoided.

===== PAGE 682 =====
682   c h a p t e r 7.11      Endocrine Surgery

                                Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (p. B-3), with muscle relaxant titrated to effect. Avoid hyperventila-
                                                            tion or hypoventilation (acidosis will ↑ Ca++ levels, while alkalosis will ↓ Ca++ levels). Main-
                                                            tain adequate hydration and UO throughout the procedure.

                                Emergence                   No special considerations (see Postop Complications, below).

                                Blood and fluid             Minimal blood loss                            Avoid Ca++-containing iv solution (e.g., LR), use
                                   requirements             IV: 18 ga × 1                                 Normosol, NS. Surgeon may request blood samples
                                                            NS @ 5–8 mL/kg/h                              to be drawn for pre- and postexcision PTH levels.

                                Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)                    Others as indicated by patient status.
                                                            ± arterial line                               Frequent blood samples for PTH are required
                                                                                                          during a parathyroidectomy.

                                Positioning                 ✓ and pad all pressure points                 Patients should be positioned carefully as they tend
                                                            ✓ eyes                                        to be osteopenic and are prone to pathologic bone
                                                                                                          fractures. Slight head-up position may ↓ blood loss
                                                                                                          and improve surgical visibility without significantly
                                                                                                          ↑ risk of VAE.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications               Hypocalcemia                                  Hypocalcemia may occur in the immediate postop
        General Surgery

                                                            Hypocalcemic tetany                           period. Sx include paresthesias, muscle spasm, tet-
                                                                                                          any, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and apnea. Rx:
                                                                                                          oral Ca++ supplementation; if severe, 10–20 mL Ca++
                                                                                                          gluconate 10% over 10 min. Follow levels and repeat
                                                                                                          therapy until the clinical signs of hypocalcemia are
                                                                                                          controlled. CPAP is effective for airway obstruction.
                                                            Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury              Recurrent laryngeal nerve dysfunction can be moni-
                                                            Hematoma with airway compromise               tored by having the patient vocalize the letter “e.”
                                                                                                          Unilateral vocal cord dysfunction results in hoarse-
                                                                                                          ness, whereas bilateral vocal cord dysfunction results
                                                                                                          in aphonia. CPAP is effective for airway obstruction.

                                Pain                        Oral narcotic analgesics
                                  management

                                Tests                       Serial measurements of:                       The lowest Ca++ level usually is seen after 4–5 d
                                                              Ca++                                        postop. Follow clinical Sx of hypocalcemia: Trous-
                                                              Phosphate                                   seau’s sign (carpopedal spasm in response to appli-
                                                              Mg++                                        cation of a BP cuff at a pressure > SBP for 3 min);
                                                            Others as clinically indicated                Chvostek’s sign (contracture of the facial muscles
                                                                                                          produced by tapping on the facial nerve).

                                Suggested Readings
                                 1. Abbas G, Dubner S, Heller KS: Re-operation for bleeding after thyroidectomy and parathyroidectomy. Head Neck 2001;
                                    23(7):544–6.
                                 2. Bellantone R, Raffaelli M, DE Crea C, et al: Minimally invasive parathyroid surgery. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2011; 31(4):207–15.
                                 3. Carling T, Udelsman R: Focused approach to parathyroidectomy. World J Surg 2008; 32(7):1512–7.
                                 4. Doherty GM: Parathyroid gland. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore KD, Doherty GM, eds. Greenfield’s Surgery: Scientific
                                    Principles and Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006, 1310–33.
                                 5. Gauger PG, Thompson NW: Persistent or recurrent hyperparathyroidism. In: Cameron JL, eds. Current Surgical Therapy, 7th
                                    edition. Mosby Inc, St. Louis: 2001, 668–71.
                                 6. Greene A, Milas M, Siperstein A: Bilateral neck exploration for primary hyperparathyroidism. In: Duh QY, Clark OH,
                                    Kebebew E, eds. Atlas of Endocrine Surgical Techniques. Saunders, Philadelphia: 2010, 113–133.
                                 7. Mihai R, Farndon JR: Parathyroid disease and calcium metabolism. Br J Anaesth 2000; 85:29–43.
                                 8. Schwartz JJ, Rosenbaum SH: Anesthesia and the endocrine system. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical
                                    Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1129–51.

===== PAGE 683 =====
Adrenalectomy        683

                   ADRENALECTOMY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Adrenalectomy can be performed via a number of different approaches, each with its own merits.
                   Traditionally, the adrenal glands have been removed with an open incision through either the transperitoneal or
                   extraperitoneal (flank) approach (Fig. 7.11-8). With some exceptions (see below), laparoscopic approaches are
                   becoming the favored methods. Indication in malignant disease or metastasis remains controversial and is currently
                    being evaluated. Relative contraindications include large adrenal adenocarcinomas (> 5 cm), malignant pheochro-
                    mocytoma, invasive adrenal mass, large adrenal mass (> 8–10 cm), or other contraindications to abdominal laparo-
                    scopic surgery (e.g., multiple previous abdominal surgeries). Each approach is discussed individually, but their basic
                    principles remain the same. The anatomy of the retroperitoneum is shown in Fig. 7.11-7.
                   Open transperitoneal approach: This approach allows for easy access to both adrenals and is preferred for large
                   tumors. A midline or bilateral subcostal incision (Fig. 7.11-8) is used, with the patient in the supine position. The left
                   adrenal is accessed by incising the lateral peritoneal attachments of the spleen. The spleen and tail of the pancreas are
                   reflected medially, Gerota’s fascia is incised, and the upper pole of the kidney is separated from the adrenal gland. The left
                   adrenal vein is identified arising from the renal vein and is ligated and divided between ties or using an endovascular sta-
                   pler. A combination of blunt and sharp dissection is used to fully mobilize and resect the gland. The right gland is exposed
                   by retracting the liver cephalad and taking down the hepatic flexure inferiorly. The duodenum and pancreas are rotated
                   medially to expose the inferior vena cava (IVC). Downward traction is placed on the right kidney and the right adrenal
                   vein is identified entering the IVC. The adrenal vein is circumferentially controlled and divided and the gland is excised.

                                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                                                                                                        Left
                                                   Right
                                                   Ri
                                                    igh
                                                     ghtt                                              kidney
                                                                                                       kidn
                                                                                                       kidneey
                                                                                                         dn ey
                                                  kidney
                                                  kidney

                               Figure 7.11-7. Anatomic relationships of the adrenal glands. Note the origins of the
                               three main arteries: inferior phrenic, aortic, and renal branches. Note also the single
                               draining veins (except for a small accessory right adrenal vein): the right-located
                               superior and medial, and the left-found inferior and medial. (Ao = aorta; Ce = celiac;
                               LAd = left adrenal gland; RAd = right adrenal gland.) (Reproduced with permission
                               from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                               Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 684 =====
684   c h a p t e r 7.11      Endocrine Surgery

                                                    Bilateral subcostal                Midline                   Flank

                                                        Posterior (A)               Posterior (B)            Thoracoabdomial
        General Surgery

                                          Figure 7.11-8. Potential incisions for adrenalectomy. (Reproduced with permission
                                          from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                          Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                Open extraperitoneal approach (flank): Before the advent of laparoscopic surgery, this approach was favored
                                to minimize pain and improve postop recovery of adrenalectomy through the use of a smaller incision and by re-
                                maining extraperitoneal. In general, this approach is best used for unilateral, smaller tumors. The patient is placed
                                in the prone jackknife position, and a dorsal curved flank incision is made, exposing the 12th rib. The rib is resected,
                                Gerota’s fascia is identified and incised, and the adrenal gland is removed.
                                Laparoscopic anterior transperitoneal approach: This approach may be used for bilateral adrenalectomy
                                with the patient in the supine position. The surgical plan is similar to that of the transabdominal open approach, but
                                is associated with longer operating times and additional trocar sites for placement of more retractors to mobilize the
                                intraabdominal organs.
                                Laparoscopic lateral transperitoneal approach: This is the preferred approach for adrenalectomy in most
                                centers. The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position with the operative site up and is immobilized with
                                a carefully placed beanbag to minimize nerve compression injuries. The patient is prepped for either an open or
                                laparoscopic approach (so that conversion to an open procedure may be done swiftly, if necessary). If both adrenal
                                glands are to be removed, the right is done first, as there is a slightly higher risk of converting to an open procedure
                                because of the proximity of the adrenal vein to the IVC.
                                For right adrenalectomy, pneumoperitoneum is established, and four ports are inserted several fingerbreadths
                                below the costal margin between the midabdomen and midaxillary line (Fig. 7.11–9). Attachments to the right lobe
                                of the liver are divided, and the liver is reflected medially in order to bring the adrenal and IVC into view. The retro-
                                peritoneum is incised too close to the IVC to expose the right adrenal vein, which is carefully isolated, clipped, and
                                divided. Dissection of the gland then proceeds out laterally and up superiorly using a laparoscopic energy device.
                                Once fully mobilized, the gland is removed through a laparoscopic retrieval bag.
                                The left adrenal gland is approached in a similar fashion. After placement of the trocars, the lateral splenic attach-
                                ments are incised and the spleen and tail of the pancreas are rotated medially to expose the anterior surface of the kid-
                                ney (Fig. 7.11-10), the inferior and medial edges of the gland are mobilized first, allowing for the left adrenal vein to be
                                identified. After the vein is controlled, the remainder of the gland is dissected free and the gland is withdrawn as above.

===== PAGE 685 =====
Adrenalectomy       685

                   Laparoscopic retroperitoneal approach: This technique is particularly good for patients who have undergone
                   previous abdominal surgery as it avoids the peritoneal cavity and adhesions altogether. The patient is intubated on
                   the stretcher and positioned prone on the operating table with slight flexion at the hips and knees. Bolsters are placed
                   under the hips and chest to allow space for the abdomen and pannus. Three ports are placed horizontally below the
                   costal margin into the retroperitoneal space. The posterior retroperitoneal plane is developed, separating perineph-
                   ric and periadrenal fat away from the peritoneum and paraspinous muscles. The inferior border of the adrenal is
                   divided from the superior pole of the kidney, which is rotated inferiorly and medially to help expose the adrenal vein.
                   Medial dissection of the adrenal gland from the paraspinous muscles will reveal the inferior phrenic vein on the left
                   and IVC on the right. These structures further facilitate identification of the adrenal vein, which is ligated and divided
                   with clips or an energy sealant device. Once controlled, the adrenal gland is separated from the filmy attachments to
                   the peritoneum and removed via an extraction bag.
                   Robot-assisted approach: Both robotic transperitoneal and retroperitoneal adrenalectomy have been
                   described. Advantages of the robot include a 3-dimensional view of the operative field, superior ergonomics, and a
                    stable camera platform. Although patient outcomes have been comparable to that of laparoscopic adrenalectomy,
                    training and cost are major drawbacks to the approach.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Functioning adrenal tumors (i.e., aldosteronoma, pheochromocytoma, cortisol-producing
                   adrenal tumor), nonfunctioning adrenal lesions (i.e., incidentaloma, angiomyolipoma), solitary adrenal metastasis
                   with otherwise negative metastatic survey, adrenocortical carcinoma.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Open Adrenalectomy                                      Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy

                                                                                                                                                               General Surgery
                     Position                Transperitoneal: supine; extraperitoneal: prone         Transperitoneal anterior: supine; transperito-
                                             jackknife                                               neal lateral: decubitus; retroperitoneal: prone

                     Incision                Transperitoneal: midline or bilateral subcostal (Fig.   Transperitoneal anterior: 4–5 trocar incisions
                                             7.11-8); extraperitoneal: dorsal flank oblique or       (Fig. 7.11-9); transperitoneal lateral: 3–4
                                             curved posterior                                        trocar incisions; retroperitoneal: 3 trocar
                                                                                                     incisions

                     Special                 Transperitoneal: Denier or Bookwalter retractor;        Transabdominal anterior/lateral; retroperi-
                       instrumentation       extraperitoneal: none                                   toneal: video set-up

                     Unique                  BP monitoring essential for pheochromocytoma            ⇐
                       considerations        patients

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g                                         ⇐

                     Surgical time           1–2 h                                                   1–3 h

                     Closing                 Hemostasis; hemodynamic stability                       ⇐
                       considerations

                     EBL                     100–250 mL                                              ⇐

                     Postop care             Continue monitoring BP; PACU → ward; ± ICU,             ⇐
                                             based on hemodynamic stability

                     Mortality               < 0.5%                                                  ⇐

                     Morbidity               Overall: 1–12%                                          ⇐
                                             Bleeding: < 10%                                         ⇐
                                             Pancreatic fistula: < 1%                                ⇐
                                             DVT: 0.8%                                               ⇐
                                             PE: 0.5%                                                ⇐
                                             Renovascular HTN: < 1%                                  ⇐
                                             Peroneal nerve palsy: < 1%                              ⇐
                                             Venous thrombosis with embolism (Cushing’s): 2%         ⇐

                     Pain score              6–8                                                     5–6

===== PAGE 686 =====
686   c h a p t e r 7.11   Endocrine Surgery

                                                                            Liver
                                                                                             IVC
                                                                                                   Adrenal gland

                                                                         Camera                         Duodenum

                                                                         Triangular
                                                                          ligament

                                                                                    Kidney

                                         Figure 7.11-9. Port placement for laparoscopic right adrenalectomy. Relevant
                                         anatomy is displayed through the right lobe of the liver. (Reproduced with permission
                                         from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
        General Surgery

                                         Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                         Figure 7.11-10. Exposure of left adrenal after mobilization of the spleen. (Reproduced
                                         with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery, 4th edition. Lippincott
                                         Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 687 =====
Adrenalectomy   687

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              13–75 yr

                     Male:Female            1:2.8

                     Incidence              Pheochromocytoma: 0.4–2% of all hypertensive patients
                                            Primary hyperaldosteronism: ~4% of all hypertensive patients
                                            Cushing’s syndrome: 6/1 million

                     Etiology               Functional cortical adenoma (aldosteronoma, cortisol-secreting tumor), adrenocortical carci-
                                            noma, pheochromocytoma (benign or malignant), large nonfunctioning incidentaloma, solitary
                                            adrenal metastasis; palliation for persistent Cushing’s disease, ectopic ACTH syndrome. Idio-
                                             pathic bilateral hyperplasia is usually treated medically.

                     Associated             HTN (75–80%); diabetes mellitus (10–15%)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Cushing’s syndrome: Hyperadrenocorticism can be due to adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal carcinoma, pituitary

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                   hypersecretion (Cushing’s disease), hypersecretion from exogenous tumor, or exogenous steroid administration
                    (most common). Adrenalectomy is the traditional treatment for hyperadrenocorticism 2° adrenal carcinoma. These
                    typically moon-faced patients present with one or more of the following: HTN 2° glucocorticoids, renin (usually not
                    severe); renal calculi; osteoporosis; glucose intolerance; personality changes; and myopathy. In addition, a fragile
                    vasculature predisposes these patients to easy bruising and difficult vascular access.

                    Respiratory             Patient may be obese with all attendant problems of morbid obesity (see Preoperative Con-
                                            siderations in Operations for Morbid Obesity, p. 514).
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular          HTN, hypervolemia, dysrhythmias 2° hypokalemia
                                            Tests: ECG; orthostatic vital signs; consider ECHO to evaluate LV function, if indicated
                                            from H&P.

                    Renal                   Excess steroid production → Na+ retention, K+ excretion and insulin intolerance
                                            (hyperglycemia).
                                            Tests: UA; creatinine; glucose; urine concentrations of catecholamine metabolites; others
                                            as appropriate

                    Neurological            Psychiatric changes, headache

                    Musculoskeletal         Striae, muscular wasting, buffalo hump, truncal obesity, thin skin, easy bruisability, osteo-
                                            penia (compression fractures), weakness

                    Hematologic             Polycythemia

                    Laboratory              Tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication           Midazolam (1–2 mg iv), consider withhold if morbidly obese

                   Conn’s syndrome: Hyperaldosteronism can be primary (Conn’s syndrome–adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia) or
                   secondary (caused by excess renin secretion related to renal dysfunction). These patients are typically hypokalemic
                   and alkalotic → muscle weakness, paresthesias, tetany and polyuria. They may also be hypervolemic → CHF, hyper-
                   natremic and hypertensive (diastolic).

===== PAGE 688 =====
688   c h a p t e r 7.11    Endocrine Surgery

                                Respiratory               Respiratory muscle weakness.
                                                          Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                Cardiovascular            HTN, dysrhythmias, T wave, + U wave
                                                          Tests: ECG; orthostatic vital signs; consider ECHO to evaluate LV function, if indicated
                                                          from H&P.

                                Renal                     Renal HTN, polyuria, polydipsia, ↓ K, ↑ Na. Correction of hypokalemia requires > 24 h
                                                          supplemental K infusion (e.g., 5–20 mEq/h).
                                                          Tests: UA; creatinine; glucose; urine concentrations of catecholamine metabolites; others
                                                          as appropriate

                                Musculoskeletal           Conn’s syndrome: muscle weakness, tetany, sensitivity to muscle relaxants, osteoporosis

                                Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P

                                Premedication             Spironolactone often given to inhibit excess aldosterone effects. Midazolam (1–2 mg iv);
                                                          hydrocortisone 100 mg q 8 h.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA (± epidural for postop analgesia). If postop epidural analgesia is planned, place-
                                ment of catheter prior to anesthetic induction is helpful in establishing correct placement in the epidural space and
        General Surgery

                                ensuring a bilateral block (accomplished by placing 5–7 mL of 1% lidocaine via the epidural and eliciting a segmental
                                 block). Epidurals cannot be used for a posterior approach because they are in the operative field.

                                Induction                 Gentle iv induction and muscle relaxation (vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg). Patient should be
                                                          adequately anesthetized prior to any stimulation. Unopposed parasympathetic response to
                                                           laryngoscopy may → bradycardia/asystole.

                                Maintenance               Volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane), opiate, muscle relaxant. N2O may cause bowel distention
                                                          and is best avoided. Local anesthetic (2% lidocaine 3–5 mL q 60 min) can be injected into
                                                          the epidural catheter to provide both anesthesia and optimal surgical exposure (contracted
                                                          bowel and profound muscle relaxation). A continuous infusion of local anesthetic (e.g., 2%
                                                          lidocaine or 0.25% bupivacaine) at 3–5 mL/h may enhance hemodynamic stability. Some
                                                          anesthesiologists will not use the epidural catheter intraop because chemical “sympathec-
                                                          tomy” is more difficult to reverse. If epidural opiates are used for postop analgesia, a load-
                                                          ing dose (e.g., hydromorphone 0.4–1.0 mg) should be administered at least 1 hour before
                                                          the conclusion of surgery. Systemic sedatives (opiates, benzodiazepines, etc.) should be
                                                          minimized during this type of anesthetic as they increase the likelihood of postop respira-
                                                          tory depression.

                                Emergence                 Depends on ease of the surgical procedure and the hemodynamic stability of the patient
                                                          intraop. If patient is hemodynamically unstable, hypothermic, or has a large 3rd-space fluid
                                                          requirement, consider postop ventilation.

                                Blood and fluid           Anticipate large fluid loss.            As blood loss can be significant, blood should be
                                   requirements           IV: 14–16 ga × 2                        immediately available. If procedure does not involve
                                                          NS/LR @ 10–15 mL/kg/h                   cancer, cell-saving devices can be utilized. Guide
                                                          Warm all fluids.                        fluid management by EBL, known volume deficits,
                                                          ± Cell Saver                            UO, and filling pressures/CO if available.
                                                          Central line

                                Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)              Others as clinically indicated. Forced air warmer
                                                          UO                                      useful for maintaining body temperature.

                                Complications             Labile HTN                              Surgical manipulation of the adrenal may cause ↑↑
                                                                                                  BP and dysrhythmias. Rx: Alert surgeon and con-
                                                                                                  trol BP with esmolol/SNP.

===== PAGE 689 =====
Adrenalectomy       689

                    Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points                Strict attention to patient positioning, padding, and
                                              ✓ eyes                                   taping are important in patients with glucocorticoid
                                                                                       excess because of osteopenia and thin, easily trau-
                                                                                       matized skin.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Pneumothorax                             Dx: pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, ↑ RR, ↓ breath
                                              Hypoglycemia                             sounds, hypoxemia, lethargy or altered mental status.
                                                                                       Frequent glucose checks and CXR. Treat with glu-
                                                                                       cose, O2, chest tube, and reintubation as necessary.
                                              Hypoadrenocorticism after tumor          Consider glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
                                              resection                                replacement—hydrocortisone 100 mg q 8 h.
                                              Cushing’s syndrome:
                                                Hypoventilation 2° to obesity
                                                (hypoxemia, hypercarbia)
                                                HTN

                    Pain                      Epidural analgesia (p. C-3)               Patient should be recovered in an ICU or ward
                      management              PCA (p. C-3)                             a ccustomed to treating the side effects of epidural
                                                                                        opiates (e.g., respiratory depression, breakthrough
                                                                                        pain, nausea, pruritus).
                                              CXR; ECG; electrolytes; glucose

                                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                    Tests

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
                   Pheochromocytoma: Tumors of chromaffin tissue origin release massive amounts of catecholamines (norepineph-
                   rine > epinephrine) and are responsible for the patient’s clinical presentation. The tumor is usually found unilaterally in
                   one of the adrenal glands, but also can be found anywhere in the body that chromaffin tissue arises (e.g., urinary blad-
                   der, sympathetic chain). There is an increased incidence of pheochromocytoma in certain diseases ( multiple-endocrine
                   neoplasia II, neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, Sturge-Weber syndrome, von Hippel-Lindau disease).
                   These patients require extensive preop preparation, consisting of α-blockade (phenoxybenzamine 40–400 mg/d) and
                   should ideally be monitored closely by the anesthesiologist who is to provide the intraop management. In contrast to
                   its use in essential HTN, ß-blockade is not indicated to control hypertension in patients with pheochromocytoma and
                   is dangerous when used alone. When used alone, ß-blockade may cause serious hypertension, ↓ CO, intense vasocon-
                   striction → CHF, organ ischemia, and shock (unopposed α-agonism). Patients with tachydysrhythmias may require
                   ß-blockade to control reflex tachycardia but only after institution of α-blockers. Titration of adrenergic blockade may
                   take 2–8 wk and should be titrated to relief of all episodic symptoms (HAs, sweating, palpitations) and control of blood
                   pressure. Patients should receive their effective α-blocker dose for 1–2 wk before surgery. Inadequate preop prepara-
                   tion will increase the perioperative morbidity of patients with pheochromocytomas. The a dequacy of medical therapy
                   is assessed by the absence of symptoms of catecholamine excess, and BP in the normal range. “Resetting” of autoregula-
                   tion, including cardiac “recovery” from catecholamine-induced myocarditis/cardiomyopathy and organ recovery from
                   ischemia, may be an important process that prepares the patient to tolerate the surgery and posttumor removal period.
                   It is anticipated that some degree of postural hypotension will be observed during titration of phenoxybenzamine. A
                   max BP of = 150/80 (usually much better than this can be achieved) in the 36 h preceding surgery, SBP dropping by
                   > 15% on standing, but not less than an absolute BP of 80/45; no ST-T wave changes, and resolution of episodic symp-
                   toms, for 2 wk prior to surgery is the goal. There is no rush to surgery.

                    Respiratory               Cardiogenic pulmonary edema

                    Cardiovascular            Paroxysmal/continuous HTN, tachydysrhythmias, orthostatic hypotension, hypovolemia,
                                              myocardial dysfunction, cardiomyopathy, ventricular ectopy, ↓ intravascular volume, ↓
                                              sensitivity of a and b (cardiac)-receptors to normal levels of catecholamines, CHF, acute
                                              myocarditis.
                                              Tests: ECG; ± CK/TP enzymes, orthostatic vital signs; ECHO to evaluate LV function and
                                              mitral valve, and r/o cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, takotsubo, dilated, etc.)

===== PAGE 690 =====
690   c h a p t e r 7.11     Endocrine Surgery

                                Renal                     HTN from excess catecholamine state may damage kidneys; hyperglycemia.
                                                          Tests: UA; creatinine; glucose; HbA1c urine concentrations of catecholamine metabolites;
                                                          others as appropriate

                                Neurological              Sx include: Tremulousness, headache, anxiety, nervousness, personality changes, psychosis
                                                          (rare), paresthesia in arms, hypertensive retinopathy, dilated pupils.

                                Musculoskeletal           Weight loss, weakness, fatigue

                                Hematologic               Polycythemia 2° hemoconcentration (common) or tumor erythropoietin production (rare)

                                Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P.

                                Premedication             ± Midazolam (0.025–0.05 mg/kg iv). Preop steroid replacement if bilateral adrenalectomy
                                                          is contemplated.

                                Anesthetic technique: GETA: Establish invasive hemodynamic monitoring (arterial and PA lines) PRIOR to
                                induction using iv fentanyl (50–200 mcg) and generous local anesthesia. (This is not difficult, can be done safely with
                                 ultrasound, and provides all hemodynamic information to the anesthesiologist from the start; it also lets the anesthe-
                                siologist pay attention to the patient at the start of the anesthesia/surgery, rather than being distracted with placing
                                invasive lines after induction). Femoral or axillary arterial pressure monitoring is preferred over radial artery because
                                of the concern over monitoring “central” arterial pressures in a patient who may experience high catecholamine lev-
                                els during surgery with intense vasoconstriction. If postop epidural analgesia is planned (open surgical procedures),
                                placement of catheter prior to anesthetic induction is helpful in establishing correct placement in the epidural space
                                and ensuring a bilateral block (accomplished by placing 5–7 mL of 2% lidocaine without epinephrine) via the epi-
        General Surgery

                                dural and eliciting a segmental block. Administering epidural narcotic (hydromorphone 0.4–1.0 mg) prior to skin in-
                                cision will enhance preemptive analgesia effect if lidocaine test dose is not used. Epidural catheters cannot be used for
                                a posterior approach because they are in the operative field. Epidurals are not indicated for laparoscopic procedures.
                                Epidurals block neurally mediated sympathetic responses and may → ↓ tumor release of catecholamines, but do not
                                block catecholamine release resulting from direct surgical manipulation of tumor. Local anesthetic-induced sympa-
                                thetic block after tumor resection may compound ↓ BP at this important stage in the operation.

                                Induction                 Gentle iv induction (titration to effect with propofol) and muscle relaxation (vecuronium
                                                          0.1 mg/kg or rocuronium 0.8 mg/kg). Deep mask GA prior to laryngoscopy. Consider dou-
                                                          ble DL with LTA spray (4% lidocaine, 4 mL).

                                Maintenance               Volatile anesthetic (isoflurane, sevoflurane), opiate (hydromorphone), muscle relaxant.
                                                          Most patients who undergo laparoscopic surgery are able to be extubated at the end of the
                                                          case, so use of sedatives (opiates, benzodiazepines, etc.) should be minimized during this
                                                          type of anesthetic to avoid postop respiratory depression.
                                                          Intraop HTN Rx:
                                                              1. Na+ nitroprusside 0.5–3.0 mcg/kg/min
                                                              2. Fenoldopam 0.1–1 .5 mcg/kg/min
                                                              3. Nitroglycerin 0.5–10 mcg/kg/min
                                                          MgSO4, (1–2 g iv) may provide some additional BP control. The surgeon may need to
                                                          interrupt the tumor manipulation to control BP.
                                                          Intraop Arrhythmia Rx:
                                                          Esmolol is not used to control htn, but can be used (50–300 mcg/kg/min) for controlling
                                                          reflex tachycardia from the above agents or excessive β stimulation from tumor-released
                                                          catecholamines. Amiodarone (150 mg bolus, then infusion 1 mg/min) may be needed for
                                                          supraventricular/ventricular ectopy (especially with epinephrine-secreting tumors).
                                                          Hypotension (after tumor removal) Rx:
                                                              1. anticipation → fluid loading prior to tumor removal
                                                              2. fluid resuscitation based on PA pressures, TEE, stroke volume response, SvO2
                                                              3. inotropes (epinephrine) if ↓ CO
                                                              4. vasopressor (vasopressin) if ↓ MAP with normal or ↑ CO
                                                          Good communication with surgical team is very important, especially when the adrenal
                                                          gland is being mobilized, and when the tumor veins are being ligated.

===== PAGE 691 =====
Adrenalectomy       691

                    Emergence          Depends on ease of the surgical procedure and the hemodynamic stability of the patient
                                       after tumor removal. If patient is hemodynamically unstable, hypothermic, or has a large
                                       3rd-space fluid requirement, consider postop ventilation, as with any other surgical case.
                                       Most cases done laparoscopically can be extubated.

                    Blood and fluid    Prepare for large fluid loss (unusual).    As blood loss may be significant (esp with R sided
                       requirements    IV: 14–16 ga × 2                           t umors–near IVC), blood should be available. Guide
                                       NS/LR @ 10–15 mL/kg/h                       fluid management by UO, filling pressures, CO, TEE,
                                       Warm all fluids.                            SvO2, PPV, SVV.
                                       ± Cell Saver                               ? safety of cell saver blood if tumor margins
                                                                                  breached

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (p. B-1)                 Forced air warmer useful for maintaining body tem-
                                       UO                                         perature. The use of TEE may be helpful in estab-
                                       Arterial line (femoral/axillary)           lishing fluid depending on other monitors used.
                                       CVP/± PA catheter with
                                       c ontinuous ScvO2 or SvO2
                                       ± TEE

                    Complications      ↑↑↑ BP and dysrhythmias                    Surgical manipulation of the tumor will cause
                                                                                  ↑↑ BP ± dysrhythmias. Rx: Control BP with SNP/
                                                                                  fenoldopam/TNG and HR with esmolol and alert
                                                                                  surgeon if you need him to interrupt dissection.
                                       ↓↓ BP (postexcision—most dan-              ↓↓ BP common after removal of tumor. May be

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                       gerous part of anesthetic)                 severe and life-threatening. Rx: anticipate event;
                                                                                   fluids, vasopressin, or epinephrine infusions
                                                                                   depending on need for inotropic support. Standard
                                                                                    vasopressers (phenylephrine) may not be effective
                                                                                    in face of residual α-blockade.

                    Positioning        ✓ and pad pressure points
                                       ✓ eyes

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications      Pneumothorax                                  Dx: pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, ↑ RR, ↓ breath
                                                                                  sounds, hyperresonance to percussion on side of
                                                                                  ptx, hypoxemia. ✓  CXR. Rx: O2; chest tube and
                                                                                  reintubation as necessary.
                                       Hypoglycemia                                  Return of normal insulin sensitivity can cause
                                                                                   profound hypoglycemia. Rx: anticipate + use D5LR
                                                                                     as maintenance fluids.
                                       Hypoadrenocorticism after tumor               Consider glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
                                       resection (usually only with bilat-          replacement → hydrocortisone 100 mg q 8 h.
                                       eral tumors)
                                       HTN                                        Patient may have other cause for HTN (e.g., essen-
                                                                                  tial HTN).
                                       Hypotension                                Continue vasopressor/inotropes, fluids as indicated.
                                       Myocardial dysfunction                     Patient should be recovered in ICU overnight.
                                       Pulmonary edema

                    Pain               Epidural analgesia (p. C-3). PCA            After leaving an ICU, patients with e pidurals should
                      management       (p. C-3).                                   be recovered on a ward accustomed to treating the
                                                                                   side effects of epidural opiates (e.g., respiratory
                                                                                  depression, breakthrough pain, nausea, pruritus).

                    Tests              CXR; ECG; electrolytes; close
                                       glucose monitoring q 1–2 h × 12 h

===== PAGE 692 =====
692   c h a p t e r 7.11     Endocrine Surgery

                                Suggested Readings
                                 1. Brunt LM: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy. In: Cameron JL, eds. Current Surgical Therapy, 7th edition. Mosby Inc., St. Louis:
                                    2001, 1460–7.
                                 2. Colen TY, Mihm FG, Mason TP, Roberson JB: Catecholamine-secreting paragangliomas: recent progress in diagnosis and
                                    perioperative management. Skull Base 2009; 19(6):377–85.
                                 3. Kebebew E, Siperstein AE, Clark OH, et al: Results of laparoscopic adrenalectomy for suspected and unsuspected malignant
                                    adrenal neoplasms. Arch Surg 2002; 137(8):948–53.
                                 4. Mihm FG: Pheochromocytoma: decreased perioperative mortality. Anesth Clin North Am 1998; 16(3):645–62.
                                 5. Nigri G, Rosman AS, Petrucciani N, et al: Meta-analysis of trials comparing laparoscopic transperitoneal and retroperitoneal
                                    adrenalectomy. Surgery 2013; 153(1):111–9.
                                 6. Olson JA: Adrenal gland. In: Mulholland MW, Lillemore ED, Doherty GM eds. Greenfield’s Surgery, Scientific Principles and
                                    Practice, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1334–53.
                                 7. Schwartz JJ, Rosenbaum SH: Anesthesia and the endocrine system. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical
                                    Anesthesia, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1129–51.
                                 8. Taskin H, Berber E: Robotic adrenalectomy. J Surg Oncol 2012; 106(5):622–5.
                                 9. Witteles RM, Kaplan EL, Roizen MF: Safe and cost-effective preoperative preparation of patients with pheochromocytoma.
                                    Anesth Analg 2000; 91:302–4.
        General Surgery

===== PAGE 693 =====
c h a p t e r

                          7.12 Liver/Kidney/Pancreas
                                        Transplantation

                                        surgeons
                                        Amy E. Gallo, MD (Kidney, pancreas transplantation)
                                        Marc L. Melcher, MD, PhD (Kidney, pancreas
                                          transplantation)
                                        Dev M. Desai, MD, PhD, FACS (Liver transplantation)
                                        Carlos O. Esquivel, MD, PhD (Liver transplantation)

                                        anesthesiologists
                                        Timothy Angelotti, MD, PhD (Kidney, pancreas
                                          transplantation, multiorgan procurement)
                                        Hendrikus J. M. Lemmens, MD, PhD
                                          (Liver transplantation)

===== PAGE 694 =====
KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION—CADAVERIC AND
                                LIVE-DONOR
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Kidney transplantation offers patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) freedom from dialysis. The
                                source of the renal graft may be a cadaveric donor, a relative (e.g., parent, sibling) or a genetically unrelated donor
                                such as a spouse, friend, or person through paired donor exchange.
                                After induction of anesthesia, a 3-way Foley catheter is placed into the bladder. The kidney allograft is placed in the
                                extraperitoneal iliac fossa. A curvilinear incision is made in the right or left lower quadrant. The retroperitoneal space
                                is developed by retracting the peritoneum medially and cephalad exposing the iliac vessels. A self-retaining retractor
                                is usually placed to maintain exposure. The external iliac artery and vein are identified and surrounding lymphat-
                                ics are ligated and divided. Several centimeters of the vessels are mobilized. The external iliac vein is clamped first
                                and the r enal-vein-to-iliac-vein anastomosis is performed. Then the external iliac artery is clamped and an artery-to
                                renal-artery anastomosis is performed. The clamps are then released starting with the renal vein. (Fig. 7.12-1). The
                                 patient should be euvolemic at this point; mannitol and/or furosemide can be given. The bladder is filled with an
                                 antibiotic irrigation solution to facilitate the implantation of the ureter. The spatulated ureter is anastomosed to the
                                  mucosa of the bladder. The detrusor muscle is then reapproximated over 3–4 cm of ureter to create an antireflux valve.
                                  The wound is closed, normally leaving native kidneys intact.
                                Variant procedure or approaches: Cadaveric or live-donor transplantation
        General Surgery

                                Usual preop diagnosis: ESRD

                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                  3

                                          Figure 7.12-1. Sketch of a kidney transplant labeled 1, 2, 3 in the order of the surgical
                                          anastomoses. 1-renal vein to external iliac vein; 2-renal artery to external iliac artery, and
                                          3-ureter to bladder. The inset shows the lower quadrant curvilinear incision. (Paul Gallo,
                                          DDS).

                          694

===== PAGE 695 =====
Kidney Transplantation—Cadaveric and Live-Donor         695

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Cadaveric Kidney                                     Live-Donor Kidney

                     Position               Supine                                               ⇐

                     Incision               Lower quadrant curvilinear (Fig. 7.12–1 inset)       ⇐

                     Special                Self-retaining retractor; vascular instruments;      ⇐
                       instrumentation      CVP; Foley catheter (3-way)

                     Unique                 CVP 10–12 mm Hg; mannitol 12.5–25 g; in-             ⇐
                       considerations       traop immunosuppression before reperfusion
                                            (steroids, antilymphocyte preparation); potas-
                                            sium-free iv fluid; protection of shunt or fistula
                                            important.

                     Antibiotics            Pipercillin/tazobactam 3.375 g iv, within 1 h        Cefazolin 1–2 g iv, 1 h preop
                                            preop

                     Surgical time          1.5–3 h                                              2–3 h

                     EBL                    100–200 mL                                           ⇐

                     Postop care            Replace UO mL/mL with i.v. fluids; may have          Fluid replacement; delayed graft function
                                            delayed graft function 2° prolonged cold stor-       unlikely; ICU selectively
                                            age; ICU selectively

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                     Mortality              1–2%                                                 ⇐

                     Morbidity              Lymph or serous leak/stenosis: 3–5%                  ⇐
                                            Postop bleeding: 3–5%                                1–2%
                                            MI: 2–3%                                             ⇐
                                            Ureteral leak/stenosis: 2–3%                         ⇐
                                            Wound infection: 2–3%                                ⇐
                                            Arterial thrombosis: 1–2%                            ⇐
                                            Venous thrombosis: 1–2%                              ⇐
                                            Wound hematoma: 1–2%                                 ⇐
                                            Other infectious complications: 15–40%               ⇐

                     Pain score             5                                                    5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              3–70 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              60/1,000,000

                     Etiology               Diabetes mellitus (45%); HTN (20%); polycystic disease and others (20%); glomerulonephritis (15%)

                     Associated             CAD (40%); HTN (25%); uremic and/or diabetic neuropathy (25%); hyperparathyroidism
                       conditions           (15–20%); SVC syndrome

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Cadaveric Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation, p. 698.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Kahan BD, Ponticelli C: Principles and Practice of Renal Transplantation. Martin Dunitz, Ltd., London: 2000.
                     2. Morris PJ: Kidney Transplantation. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2001.
                     3. Odorico JS, Sollinger HW: Technical and immunosuppressive advances in transplantation for insulin-dependent diabetes
                        mellitus. World J Surg 2002; 26:194–211.

===== PAGE 696 =====
696   c h a p t e r 7.12     Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                CADAVERIC KIDNEY/PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Pancreas transplantation: Combined kidney and pancreas transplantation not only pro-
                                vides renal replacement for the Type I diabetes patient with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), but also controls
                                diabetes. Over 80% or more of pancreas transplants are performed in combination with kidney transplanta-
                                tion from the same donor (simultaneous kidney/pancreas transplant [SPK]). Pancreas transplantation also
                                can be performed for patients who have already received a kidney transplant (pancreas after kidney [PAK]).
                                Less commonly, pancreas transplantation is done for patients with brittle diabetes or with impending compli-
                                cations while they still enjoy normal or near-normal kidney function. Immunosuppression regimen for pan-
                                creas transplantation is generally more aggressive than that used for kidney transplantation, and induction
                                therapy with antilymphocyte preparation (ATG, IL-2 blockers) is commonly used.
                                The pancreas transplant is placed in the right iliac fossa, and the kidney transplant is placed in the left iliac
                                fossa. This can be done through a transperitoneal lower midline incision or through two separate extraperi-
                                toneal lower-quadrant incisions in the same manner as kidney transplantation. The graft is first prepared on
                                the back table. For arterial in-flow, a Y-graft is fashioned using the donor iliac artery bifurcation. The portal
                                vein coming off the pancreatic graft is anastomosed to the external iliac vein. The Y extension vascular graft
                                is then anastomosed to the recipient external or common iliac artery. The donor duodenum is anastomosed to
                                a loop of small bowel or to the urinary bladder to drain the exocrine secretions (Fig. 7.12-2A). With pancreas
                                transplantation, there may be significant blood loss if the graft mesenteric vessels are not occluded properly.
        General Surgery

                                After the pancreas is implanted, the kidney transplant is placed into the opposite iliac fossa (as described in
                                Kidney Transplantation, p. 694).
                                Variant procedure or approaches: The pancreas may be placed in the upper abdomen with the portal vein
                                anastomosed to the superior mesenteric vein. The exocrine secretions are bowel-drained. This more physiologic
                                approach, however, is associated with a higher technical failure rate and requires a long upper midline incision
                                (Fig. 7.12-10). Pancreatic islet cells may be infused via a radiological portal vein approach, a procedure that is usu-
                                ally performed in the radiology/angio suite.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: ESRD 2° diabetes mellitus (DM)

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine; cushion heels

                                 Incision                Midline or bilateral lower quadrant

                                 Special                 Thompson retractor; vascular instruments; Foley catheter; NG tube; CVP; arterial line
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Do not correct hyperglycemia < 300 mg/dL. Maintain adequate hydration, CVP 10–12 mm Hg;
                                   considerations        mannitol 0.25–0.5 g/kg on unclamping; intraop immunosuppression before reperfusion
                                                         (125–250 mg methylprednisolone, monoclonal or polyclonal preparation [e.g., ATG, Zenepax,
                                                         OKT3, Simulect]).

                                 Antibiotics             Pipercillin/tazobactam 3.375 g iv q 6 h × 5 d; fluconazole 200–400 mg (nl creatine clearance)

                                 Surgical time           4–6 h

                                 EBL                     250–500 mL

                                 Postop care             ICU × 1–2 d, hourly monitoring of glucose; serum glucose should decline by 50 mg/dL each
                                                         hour and remain < 200 mg/dL.

                                 Mortality               2%

                                 Morbidity               Thrombosis of graft: 5–10%
                                                         Postop bleeding: 5–10%
                                                         Wound infection: 2–6%

===== PAGE 697 =====
Cadaveric Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation    697

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity (cont’d)       Pancreatitis: 2–4%
                                              Anastomotic leak: 1%

                     Pain score               7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                15–55 yr

                     Male:Female              1:1

                     Incidence                15–20% of all patients with ESRD

                     Etiology                 Type I diabetes

                     Associated               Retinopathy (100%); uremic and/or diabetic neuropathy (50%); CAD (25–50%); gastropathy
                       conditions             (25%); hyperparathyroidism (15–20%)

                                                         Aorta                                                               Recipient
                                                                                                                             jejunum

                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                                              IVC                Kidney            Donor duodenum                               Donor
                                                                                                                               portal v.

                      Pancreas                                                                                                     SMV

                                                                                                                                   Aorta

                       Portal v.                                                 Pancreas
                                                                                 transplant

                        IIiac a.
                                                                                                                                  Kidney

                     Ex. IIiac v.
                                    A         Duodenum                                                                                 B

                                Figure 7.12-2. A: SPK transplantation, with drainage of pancreatic exocrine secretions
                                into the bladder. Note that portal vein drains into iliac vein (systemic venous [SV]
                                drainage). In normal individuals, 50% of secreted insulin is extracted from the circulation
                                in the first pass through the liver. Transplant recipients with SV have peripheral insulin
                                levels 2-2½ × higher than normal. B: SPK transplantation with drainage of pancreatic
                                exocrine secretions into the proximal jejunum (enteric drainage [ED]). This technique has
                                been adopted for SPK by most transplant centers in the United States for solitary pancreas
                                transplantation, most centers still utilize ED to allow monitoring of the urinary amylase.
                                Note that donor portal vein drains into the recipient superior mesenteric vein (portal venous
                                [PV] drainage) preventing peripheral hyperinsulinemia. Most centers continue to place
                                the pancreas in the pelvis, combining ED and SV, which requires enteric anastomosis to a
                                more distal segment of jejunum or ilium. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ,
                                et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 698 =====
698   c h a p t e r 7.12      Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                     ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR KIDNEY AND KIDNEY/
                                     PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Typically, patients presenting for renal transplantation fall into two patient populations: (1) the young and relatively
                                healthy (following dialysis), or (2) an older, more chronically ill group. Rarely, patients will present for transplant sur-
                                gery without adequate preparation (e.g., ↑ K+, ↓ pH, hypervolemia). Patients presenting for pancreas transplantation
                                are usually severe diabetics with many of the associated problems, such as CAD, autonomic neuropathy, gastropare-
                                sis, and stiff-joint syndrome (difficult intubation).

                                Respiratory                Pleuritis and pleural effusions may occur in this patient population. Increased susceptibil-
                                                           ity to infection is common in the patient with chronic uremia.

                                Cardiovascular             Pericarditis (acute or constrictive), HTN, CHF, dysrhythmias, pericardial effusion are com-
                                                           mon, especially in the undialyzed patient. Diabetes, a common cause of ESRD, is often
                                                           associated with PVD, CAD, and autonomic neuropathy.
                                                           Tests: ECG (rhythm, CAD, electrolyte abnormalities, pericarditis, LVH). Other tests
                                                           (ECHO, stress, etc.) as indicated from H&P.

                                Gastrointestinal           Gastroparesis may occur, especially in diabetic patients with autonomic neuropathy.
                                                           Consider full stomach precautions. Ranitidine (50 mg iv) and metoclopramide (10 mg iv)
                                                           should be given 60 min preop to aid gastric emptying and ↓ acidity.
        General Surgery

                                Renal                      Patients are usually on dialysis. Postdialysis goals include: K+ = 4–5 mEq/L, BUN < 60 mg%,
                                                           creatinine < 10 mg%. Metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and hypermagnesemia often pres-
                                                           ent and may require preop correction. Patients may be hypovolemic following dialysis;
                                                           3 pre- and postdialysis weight (> 2 kg loss is significant). Rapid correction of severe hy-
                                                           perkalemia can be achieved by giving 50 mL of 50% glucose iv, together with 10 U regular
                                                           insulin and 50 mEq NaHCO. Further correction can be obtained by coadministration of an
                                                           inhaled β-agonist (e.g., albuterol; 5–10 puffs).
                                                           Tests: Cr; BUN; creatinine clearance; electrolytes

                                Hematologic                These patients are frequently anemic. Preop correction usually not needed. A coagula-
                                                           tion disorder may be present with abnormal Plt function (improved by dialysis) as well as
                                                           thrombocytopenia, resulting in a prolonged bleeding time. There is a high incidence of
                                                           posttransfusion hepatitis in this patient population.
                                                           Tests: Hct; PT; PTT; Plt count; hepatic screen, consider platelet function assay.

                                Endocrine                  Assess glycemic control preop. Individualize diabetic Rx for day of surgery. In general, hold
                                                           oral agents 12–24 h, and ↓ or hold usual insulins, and consider sliding scale insulin day of
                                                           surgery. Favor hyperglycemia (≥ 120–200 mg/dL) over tight glucose control. Preop/intraop
                                                           corticosteroid immunosuppressive Rx will likely → hyperglycemia. Postop glycemic man-
                                                           agement complex and dynamic.
                                                           Tests: Serial glucose levels

                                Neurologic                 Peripheral neuropathy may occur, and specific deficits should be documented. Autonomic
                                                           neuropathy can → cardiac problems (e.g., orthostatic hypotension, ↑ HR, or ↓ HR), silent
                                                           MI, and GI problems.

                                Premedication              Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA favored. Spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural anesthesia may be considered
                                for renal transplantation, if coagulation and platelet function acceptable. Ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric and intercostal
                                nerve blockade can be utilized as an alternative method for postop pain control. Avoidance of hypotension after
                                organ(s) transplantation is an important consideration that may limit effectiveness of RA techniques.

===== PAGE 699 =====
Cadaveric Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation          699

                    Induction          Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5). ET intubation is aided by succinylcholine
                                       (1 mg/kg), if K+ < 5.5 mEq/L; otherwise, use cisatracurium (0.2–0.5 mg/kg) or rocuronium
                                       (1.2 mg/kg). Fentanyl (2–5 mcg/kg) may be used to suppress the cardiovascular response
                                       to intubation.

                    Maintenance        Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Maintain muscle relaxation with cisatracurium or ro-
                                       curonium, titrated to effect using a nerve stimulator. Avoid meperidine (accumulation of
                                       normeperidine → CNS toxicity). Anticipate prolonged drug effects, and avoid agents that
                                       are primarily excreted by the kidney.

                    Emergence          Usually extubated in the OR after protective laryngeal reflexes have returned. Ensure ad-
                                       equate reversal of NMB’s drugs. Pancreatic transplant patients (e.g., brittle diabetics, he-
                                       modynamically unstable) are sent to the ICU for close glycemic management.

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 14–16 ga × 1                       Preop fluid status is highly variable (hypo→
                       requirements    NS/colloid to keep                     hypervolemia). Give fluids to maintain CVP 10–15
                                       CVP = 10–15 mm Hg                      mm Hg. Important to maintain adequate vascular
                                       Warm fluids                            volume and BP. Mannitol (0.25–1 g/kg), furosemide
                                                                              (5–20 mg), and low-dose dopamine are often given
                                                                              with reperfusion of the kidney.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        Arterial pressure is often monitored. Avoid the
                                       Arterial line                          side of AV fistulae. Axillary artery is a useful al-
                                       CVP/PA line                            ternative. CVP is essential, and a PA line is need-
                                                                              ed occasionally (severe cardiac disease). CVP is

                                                                                                                                              General Surgery
                                                                              kept at 10–15 mm Hg, especially after the new
                                                                              kidney is reperfused, to ensure adequate renal
                                       Hct, K+, and glucose                   blood flow.
                                                                              In pancreatic transplant patients, glucose should be
                                                                              checked q 30 min and then q 10 min for the first
                                                                              h following reperfusion. Keep glucose < 300 mg/dL
                                                                              prior to reperfusion, but do not fully correct to <
                                       Neuromuscular                          150 mg/dL.
                                                                              Monitor neuromuscular block to avoid e xcessive use
                                                                              of neuromuscular relaxants; anticipate p   rolonged
                                                                              effects.

                    Positioning        3 and pad pressure points
                                       3 eyes
                                       Protect/pad AV fistulas                Pressure on AV fistula may lead to thrombosis.
                                                                              Document bruit q15 minutes.

                    Complications      Disruption of renal anastomoses        Bucking or coughing during emergence, due to in-
                                       Hemorrhage                             adequate neuromuscular blockade, may → forceful
                                       Low UO                                 tugging on transplanted kidney. This “popping” of
                                       Reperfusion injury                     kidney may → disruption of venous and arterial
                                         (pancreas transplant)                anastomoses and possible ischemic damage requir-
                                                                              ing urgent surgical revision.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications      Fluid overload and CHF                 Monitor UO. Dialysis may be needed until renal
                                       Femoral neuropathy                     function returns. Sudden cardiac arrest can compli-
                                       Hemorrhage                             cate pancreatic transplantation (due to autonomic
                                       Electrolyte abnormalities              neuropathy).
                                       Hypo/hyperglycemia                     Especially dynamic in pancreas tx
                                       PONV                                   See p. B-6.
                                       VTE                                    See p. B-8.

===== PAGE 700 =====
700   c h a p t e r 7.12     Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                Pain                       PCA (see p. C-3).                        Anticipate prolonged effect of some opiates.
                                  management               Epidural                                 Strive to avoid hypotension.

                                Tests                      Hct                                      A rise in amylase and blood glucose may indicate
                                                           Electrolytes                             failure of the pancreatic transplant.
                                                           Cr, BUN
                                                           Amylase
                                                           Glucose

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Hadimioglu N, Ertug Z, Bigat Z, et al: A randomized study comparing combined spinal epidural or general anesthesia for
                                     renal transplant surgery. Transplant Proc 2005; 37(5):2020–2.
                                  2. Halpern H, Miyoshi E, Kataoka LM, et al: Anesthesia for pancreas transplantation alone or simultaneous with kidney.
                                     Transplant Proc 2004; 36(10):3105–6.
                                  3. Lemmens HJM: Kidney transplantation: recent developments and recommendations for anesthetic management. Anesthesiol
                                     Clin North Am 2004; 22(4):651–62.
                                  4. SarinKapoor H, Kaur R, Kaur H: Anaesthesia for renal transplant surgery. Acta Anaesthesio Scand 2007; 51:1354–67.
                                  5. Shoeibi G, Babakhani B, Mohammadi SS: The efficacy of ilioinguinal-iliohypogstric and intercostal nerve co-blockade for
                                     postoperative pain relief in kidney repair recipients. Anesth Analg 2009; 108(1):330–33.
        General Surgery

                                LIVE-DONOR NEPHRECTOMY—LAPAROSCOPIC
                                AND OPEN
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Use of a kidney donated by a healthy genetically or emotionally related donor greatly increases the
                                number and quality of kidneys available for transplantation. Kidney transplantation from living donors is associated
                                with a better patient and graft survival rate. A laparoscopic (LSC) approach for kidney donation was introduced
                                in 1995 as an alternative that would reduce postop pain, wound morbidity, and recovery time associated with open
                                nephrectomy. Now the LSC approach is the procedure of choice for more than 75% of the live kidney donations in
                                the United States. Initial concerns regarding ureteral complications and longer warm ischemic time have mostly
                                subsided with the improvement of the surgical technique and greater experience. The left kidney is preferred for the
                                LSC approach, as the renal vein is longer. Some centers use the LSC approach for the right kidney with comparable
                                results.
                                The patient is positioned in lateral decubitus over a cushioned beanbag, the kidney rest is slightly elevated, and
                                pillows and an axillary roll are used to prevent compression injuries. Three or four ports are used for the pure lapa-
                                roscopic approach. The hand-assisted approach, however, has gained popularity over the years and is currently the
                                preferred technique of the majority of Transplant Centers in the United States. In this approach two or three ports
                                 are used with a 6–8 cm incision made at the level of the umbilicus or infra-umbilical. The pneumoperitoneum is kept
                                 < 15 mm Hg to avoid decreased perfusion to the kidney. Aggressive hydration and intermittent use of iv mannitol
                                 help improve kidney perfusion. On the left side, the descending colon and spleen are mobilized medially; the renal
                                 vessels are exposed; the adrenal, lumbar, and gonadal veins are clipped and divided; the ureter is mobilized en bloc,
                                 along with the gonadal vein, down to the pelvic inlet. The artery is freed from surrounding lymphatic and neural
                                 tissue as it comes off the aorta (Fig. 7.12-3). Gerota’s fascia is mobilized to completely free the kidney. The ureter
                                 is transected distally. If the procedure is done purely laparoscopically, a 6-cm suprapubic incision is then made, the
                                 peritoneum is exposed in the midline, and an 18-mm port is used to insert a 15-mm Endocatch retrieval bag. The
                                 kidney is placed in the bag as it continues to be perfused, avoiding warm ischemia. With the hand-assisted approach
                                 the incision is already made for retrieval with the surgeon’s hand. The patient is fully heparinized. An endo TA vascu-
                                 lar stapler is used to staple and transect the artery close to the aorta and the vein close to the vena cava. An endo GIA

===== PAGE 701 =====
Live-Donor Nephrectomy—Laparoscopic and Open          701

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                                Figure 7.12-3. Anatomy for laparoscopic live-donor nephrectomy. (Reproduced
                                with permission from Cho ES, Flowers JL: Laparoscopic live-donor nephrectomy.
                                In: Zuker KA, ed. Surgical Laparoscopy, 2nd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   vascular stapler can also be used. The kidney is brought to the suprapubic incision and gently extracted. The kidney
                   is immediately immersed in cold slush. The kidney is perfused with preservation solution in the usual manner. The
                   heparin is reversed with protamine, the suprapubic incision is closed, and homeostasis is verified before extracting
                   the ports. For a right nephrectomy, the right colon and duodenum are mobilized medially and the liver is retracted
                   upward. The remainder of the operation is as described for the left kidney.
                   In open nephrectomy, the donor/patient is placed in a lateral decubitus position on a flexible OR table with a kid-
                   ney rest. A beanbag or sandbags are also helpful for positioning. An incision is made from the rectus muscle, angling
                   slightly cephalic to cross into the flank just below the tip of the 12th rib. The retroperitoneum is exposed using a
                   Thompson retractor. The kidney is then mobilized, and the ureter is transected. A clamp is placed across the renal
                   artery at the aorta and the renal vein at the IVC. Just before clamping the renal artery, furosemide and/or mannitol
                   may be given to stimulate diuresis. It is important to keep the vascular volume expanded in these patients before
                   kidney removal. The kidney is removed and taken to the back table, where it is flushed with a cold preservation
                   solution. It is then transported into the recipient room for reimplantation. Some surgeons use a full dose of heparin
                    (75 U/kg) before clamping and use protamine afterward. Smaller incisions and muscle-sparing incisions are now
                    used to improve postop recovery.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Donor nephrectomy

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Laparoscopic Nephrectomy                           Open Nephrectomy

                     Position               Lateral decubitus                                  ⇐

                     Incision               3–4 ports; retrieval incision, Pfannenstiel’s or   Flank; may require 12th rib resection
                                            vertical suprapubic

===== PAGE 702 =====
702   c h a p t e r 7.12    Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                                        Laparoscopic Nephrectomy                        Open Nephrectomy

                                 Special                Foley catheter; flexible OR table with kidney   Foley catheter; Thompson retractor; flexible
                                   instrumentation      rest; beanbag; SCDs for DVT prophylaxis;        OR table with kidney rest; beanbag or sand-
                                                        harmonic scalpel                                bags; SCDs for DVT prophylaxis

                                 Unique                 Avoid ETT dislodgement when turning pa-         Possible pneumothorax; avoid ETT dislodge-
                                   considerations       tient from supine to flank position; vigorous   ment when turning patient from supine to flank
                                                        hydration.                                      position. Vigorous hydration to encourage
                                                                                                        urine production.

                                 Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv                              Cefazolin 1–2 g, iv

                                 Surgical time          2.5–4.5 h                                       2–2.5 h

                                 Closing                –                                               Delfex table to facilitate closure
                                   considerations

                                 EBL                    Minimal                                         100 mL

                                 Postop care            PACU → ward; PCA for pain management            PACU → ward; PCA for pain management

                                 Mortality              < 0.1%                                          ⇐

                                 Morbidity              Ileus: 2–5%                                     5–10%
                                                        Urinary retention: 2–5%                         5–10%
        General Surgery

                                                        Wound infection: 1–2%                           1–3%
                                                        Bleeding: 0.1–0.5%                              Pneumothorax: 1%

                                 Pain score             3–5                                             7

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range              18–70 yr                                        ⇐

                                 Male:Female            1:1                                             ⇐

                                 Incidence              Up to 50% of all kidney transplants at some     ⇐
                                                        centers

                                 Etiology               N/A                                             ⇐

                                 Associated             Good health is mandatory for kidney donation.   ⇐
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations following Kidney Transplant Nephrectomy, p. 704.

                                KIDNEY TRANSPLANT NEPHRECTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: With improvements in graft survival and immunosuppressive therapy, the necessity of removing a
                                kidney transplant graft for uncontrolled rejection has decreased significantly. This operation is divided into cat-
                                egories: early nephrectomy, performed during the first month posttransplant, and late nephrectomy, thereaf-
                                ter. Early transplant nephrectomy may be required for primary nonfunction, vascular thrombosis, and, rarely,
                                refractory rejection. In these cases, an extracapsular approach, through the original transplant incision, is used.

===== PAGE 703 =====
Kidney Transplant Nephrectomy       703

                   The kidney is freed from the surrounding adhesion to obtain vascular control of the renal artery and renal vein.
                   These structures are clamped and oversewn individually. The ureter is ligated as close as possible to the bladder and
                   excised completely, with primary repair of the bladder. A suction drain is used if minimal oozing or lymph drainage
                   is present. Late transplant nephrectomy is performed most commonly for acute, irreversible rejection with failure
                   of the renal allograft. Most of these patients have returned to dialysis, and the immunosuppressive medications are
                   stopped. Chronic infection and HTN associated with nonfunctional grafts are also an indication for surgical removal
                   of the kidney allograft. It may be a difficult operation, as intense inflammatory adhesions are present between the
                   renal capsule and the surrounding tissue. In the setting of acute late rejection, the graft is usually swollen and en-
                   larged. Hematuria may be present, and the graft is friable. Spontaneous rupture and hemorrhage have been reported.
                   The surgical approach is through the same incision as the implantation. In contrast to early transplant nephrectomy,
                   extracapsular dissection may not be possible with late nephrectomy. To avoid injury to extrarenal structures, such as
                   the iliac vessels, an intracapsular approach may be preferred. The kidney is mobilized gently from within the cap-
                   sule toward the hilum. The capsule is reopened on the medial side to have access to the renal vessel high in the hilum.
                   When the hilum is sufficiently mobilized, a strong vascular clamp is applied high in the hilum of the kidney away
                   from the iliac vessels. After clamping the hilum en bloc, confirmation of distal pulses is obtained; then the kidney
                   is excised over the vascular clamp. A running suture is used over the clamp, which is then released, and hemostasis
                   is obtained. The ureter is identified and excised as close as possible to the bladder. The intracapsular dissection of
                   the kidney may be associated with significant bleeding, as the kidney may fracture. This step should be done expedi-
                   tiously to avoid excessive bleeding. The patient must have good vascular access for fluid resuscitation. Blood must
                   be available for transfusion. After hemostasis is obtained, a low-pressure suction drain may be placed before closing.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Transplant rejection

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Previous incision used for kidney transplant

                     Instrumentation        Self-retaining retractor; vascular instruments

                     Unique                 Large-bore vascular access; PRBCs available; stress dose of steroids, if chronic usage; protec-
                       considerations       tion of shunt or fistula

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time          1–2.5 h

                     EBL                    200–1000 mL

                     Postop care            PCA for pain management → PACU → ward

                     Mortality              1–3%

                     Morbidity              Overall: 3–5%
                                            Wound infection: 3–5%
                                            Abscess formation: 1–2%
                                            Exsanguinating hemorrhage: < 1%

                     Pain score             5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              3–75 yr

                     Male:Female            1:1

                     Incidence              60/1,000,000

                     Etiology               Failed kidney transplant

                     Associated             CAD (40%); HTN (25%); uremic and/or diabetic neuropathy (25%); hyperparathyroidism (15–20%)
                       conditions

===== PAGE 704 =====
704   c h a p t e r 7.12    Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                    ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR LIVE-DONOR AND
                                     POSTTRANSPLANTATION NEPHRECTOMY
                                    PREOPERATIVE
                                In order to be a live donor, one must be in good health with bilaterally functional kidneys. Diabetes, HIV infection,
                                liver disease, and malignancy are all contraindications to kidney donations.

                                 Cardiovascular          Assess for HTN and CAD.

                                 Renal                   Normal bilateral renal function is required.
                                                         Tests: IVP; Cr, creatinine clearance

                                 Fluid status            Adequate hydration is important, and UO should be > 1.5 mL/kg/h. Various regimens are
                                                         used to ensure adequate hydration, usually with iv fluid starting the night before.

                                 Premedication           Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Organ donors are making a great sacrifice and should be
                                                         treated with special care. Standard premedication (see p. B-1).

                                    INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural for postop pain management. Epidurals are not necessary for most lapa-
                                roscopic donor nephrectomies.
        General Surgery

                                 Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                                 Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Avoid long-acting, renally excreted drugs. Ventilate to
                                                         maintain normocapnia to avoid possible renal artery vasoconstriction. Use of an epidural
                                                         with local anesthetic and/or narcotic may aid both intraop and postop pain relief, but ↓ BP
                                                         should be avoided.

                                 Emergence               Routine extubation in OR

                                 Blood and fluid         IV: 16–18 ga ×2                        Aim for a minimum of 1.5 mL/kg/h UO. Mannitol
                                    requirements         NS/LR @ 6–8 mL/h                       (0.25–1 g/kg) given iv once kidney is being manipulat-
                                                         Warm fluids                            ed, and if UO decreases. Consider dopamine infusion
                                                         UO ≥ 1.5 mL/kg/h                       to ↑ BP as needed. Limit use of direct vasoconstrictors.

                                 Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1).        CVP or invasive arterial monitoring are rarely re-
                                                                                                quired. Lower extremity NIBP measurements on
                                                                                                the same side as implant will be inaccurate during
                                                                                                period of iliac vessel clamping.

                                 Positioning             3 and pad pressure points
                                                         3 eyes

                                 Complications           Hemorrhage                             Because the vessels are tied close to the aorta and
                                                         Pneumothorax                           IVC, the possibility of severe hemorrhage exists.
                                                                                                Pneumothorax is always possible, especially when
                                                                                                the 12th rib is resected.

                                    POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications             Pneumothorax/pulmonary problems
                                                          Hemorrhage
                                                          Infection
                                                          PONV (see p. B-6)
                                                          Electrolyte abnormalities
                                                          VTE (see p. B-8)
                                                          Ileus

===== PAGE 705 =====
Liver Transplantation      705

                    Pain                       Epidural narcotics (see p. C-3). Avoid hypotension.
                      management               PCA (see p. C-3).

                    Tests                      CXR
                                               Hct. electrolytes, BUN/Cr

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Lemmens HJM: Kidney transplantation: recent developments and recommendations for anesthetic management. Anesth
                        Clin North Am 2004; 22(4):651–62.
                     2. Morris PJ: Kidney Transplantation. WB Saunders, Philadelphia: 2001.
                     3. Odorico JS, Sollinger HW: Technical immunosuppressive advances in transplantation for insulin-dependent diabetes
                        mellitus. World J Surg 2002; 26:194–211.
                     4. Sener M, Torgay A, Akpek E, et al: Regional versus general anesthesia for donor nephrectomy: effects on graft function.
                        Transplant Proc 2004; 36(10):2954–8.

                   LIVER TRANSPLANTATION

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for patients with acute and chronic end-stage
                   liver disease (ESLD). Patients with ESLD, besides intrinsic liver dysfunction, also may have other organ system
                   disease including hepatorenal and hepatopulmonary syndrome resulting in oliguria and hypoxia, respectively,
                   and hepatic hydrothorax. Patients with alcohol-mediated cirrhosis and Wilson’s disease are at risk for signifi-
                   cant cardiomyopathy, whereas those with fulminant hepatic failure may have significantly elevated intracranial
                   pressures. These additional comorbidities present an added level of complexity to the anesthetic and surgical
                   management of the liver transplant recipient. The liver transplant operation can be divided into three stages:
                   (1) hepatectomy; (2) anhepatic phase, which involves the implantation of the liver; and (3) postrevascular-
                   ization, which includes hemostasis and reconstruction of the hepatic artery and common bile duct. There are
                   many variations in the technical aspects of the liver transplant operation that may result in physiologic changes
                   during anesthesia. The anesthesiologist must be aware of these technical variations to optimize the intraopera-
                   tive management of the liver transplant recipient. Examples of these variations include cross-clamping of the
                   vena cava during the implantation of the liver, which results in impairment of the systemic venous return, with
                   possibility of profound hypotension; utilization of the venovenous bypass, which may be associated with throm-
                   bus or air embolism, and/or fibrinolysis; and the use of a “cutdown liver,” which may result in significant bleeding
                   from the cut surface following revascularization.
                   The hepatectomy may be a formidable task in patients with severe portal hypertension (HTN), coagulopathy, and
                   previous surgery in the upper abdomen. In such circumstances, blood loss is significant and may be minimized by
                   placing the patient on venovenous bypass or by creating a temporary portocaval shunt to relieve the portal HTN.
                   Table 7.12-1 lists factors that may be associated with significant blood loss during the transplant operation. The
                   hepatectomy is usually much easier in patients with acute fulminant hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, or inborn

                    Table 7.12-1. Contributing Factors Associated with Increased Blood Loss in Liver Transplantation
                      1. Severe coagulopathy                        7. Retransplantation
                      2. Severe portal HTN                          8. Transfusion reaction
                      3. Portal or splenic vein thrombosis          9. Venous bypass-induced fibrinolysis
                      4. Previous surgery in the RUQ               10. Primary graft nonfunction
                      5. Renal failure                             11. Intraop vascular complications
                      6. Uncontrolled sepsis

===== PAGE 706 =====
706   c h a p t e r 7.12     Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                errors of metabolism than in patients with shrunken cirrhotic livers, such as in postnecrotic cirrhosis from hepatitis
                                B or C, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, or Wilson’s disease, among others. The liver transplant incision is tradition-
                                ally bisubcostal, extending from the left midclavicular line across the midline to just medial of the right 12th rib,
                                with a vertical midline extension from the xiphoid process to the transverse incision. This provides wide exposure
                                to the upper abdomen.
                                The hepatectomy begins with manual exploration of the abdomen to ensure there are no occult malignan-
                                cies, abscesses, or other abdominal processes that may contraindicate proceeding with the transplant. The
                                liver is then mobilized by freeing the falciform and left cardinal ligaments, followed by entering the lesser sac
                                through the division of the gastrohepatic ligament. The mobilization of the liver and the subsequent dissection
                                of the portahepatis may be significantly complicated and a tedious process due to large, thin-walled varices that
                                require careful dissection and ligation. The dissection of the portahepatis begins with identification and ligation
                                of the hepatic artery, followed by the common bile duct. The portal vein is carefully dissected from its bifurca-
                                tion into left and right branches, proximally to its emergence from behind the pancreas. If the degree of portal
                                HTN is severe—such that mobilization of the liver may result in significant blood loss—or the patient is hemo-
                                dynamically unstable—then portal vein mobilization may be performed early so that a temporary portocaval
                                shunt or venous bypass may be instituted to allow decompression of the varices and enhance venous return to
                                the heart.
                                After the portal dissection is complete, the right lobe of the liver is mobilized. The infrahepatic vena cava is carefully
                                dissected to prevent injury to the right renal and adrenal veins, followed by mobilization of the suprahepatic vena
                                cava. The liver can be removed easily by cross-clamping and dividing the supra- or infrahepatic vena cava, with or
                                without the use of venous bypass. Alternatively, the recipient vena cava may be left in situ (piggyback technique)
                                by further mobilization of the liver with division of the short hepatic veins that run from the anterior surface of
        General Surgery

                                the vena cava directly into the posterior aspect of the liver. To gain access to the short hepatic veins, the liver must
                                be lifted and rotated to the left. This maneuver may result in partial occlusion of the inferior vena cava, which may
                                impair venous return causing a temporary drop in blood pressure. The piggyback technique, where the recipient
                                vena cava is left in situ, has the advantage that venous return is not compromised during the anhepatic phase and
                                thus precludes the need for venous bypass; however, the hepatectomy phase is longer and can be associated with
                                greater bleeding.
                                 The anhepatic phase may be associated with significant hemodynamic changes, depending on the technique used
                                 for vascular control. This stage of the operation consists of implantation of the liver allograft, with or without
                                 venous bypass. The use of venous bypass is particularly helpful in coagulopathic patients with severe portal HTN.
                                 In these high-risk patients, the goal of the venous bypass system is to relieve the portal HTN by “bypassing” the
                                liver. Cannulas, placed in the femoral and portal veins, draw the blood out of the systemic and splanchnic venous
                                 systems into a Biomedicus pump that delivers the blood into the axillary or jugular vein, maintaining the venous
                                 return (Fig. 7.12-4). This system allows the interruption of the vena cava with mild-to-moderate hemodynamic
                                 changes, depending on the blood flow rate through the system. The benefits and potential complications of the
                                 venous bypass system are listed in Table 7.12-2.
                                Wound complications and nerve injuries may be prevented by introducing the bypass cannulas percutaneously,
                                rather than approaching the vessels through a surgical incision. A subclavian or internal jugular line placed
                                preop can be easily and rapidly exchanged during the operation to bypass cannulas using the Seldinger tech-
                                nique. If lines are placed preoperatively for the specific purpose of venous bypass, a confirmatory CXR should
                                be performed to ensure that the 15 Fr or larger bypass cannula will lie in the appropriate vessel when placed
                                later in the operation. This also obviates the need for a CXR when the bypass cannula is placed later during
                                the operation when the patient may be unstable. In cases where venous bypass is utilized, vascular control is
                                obtained by placing vascular clamps across the supra- and infrahepatic vena cava or the confluence of the he-
                                patic veins (piggyback technique) and the portal vein. The splanchnic venous return is interrupted during the
                                anhepatic phase while the systemic venous return is either interrupted in the case of formal cross-clamping
                                of the supra- and infra-hepatic vena cava or mildly diminished in the case of the piggyback technique, which
                                can lead to significant hypotension unless preventive measures, as reviewed in Anesthetic Considerations
                                (p. 713), are taken (Fig. 7.12-5).
                                In a standard orthotopic liver transplant, with or without venous bypass, the recipient’s vena cava is removed,
                                leaving two cuffs—one just below the diaphragm and the other distal to the confluence of the renal veins. The

===== PAGE 707 =====
Liver Transplantation         707

                                                                                                                                                                                  General Surgery
                               Figure 7.12-4. Setup for venovenous bypass during hepatic transplantation. Cannulas
                               are placed into the portal vein to decompress the splanchnic bed and inferior vena cava
                               (through the greater saphenous vein) to decompress the lower extremities and kidneys
                               during the anhepatic phase of the transplant. A peristaltic pump is used to deliver
                               bypassed blood to the central circulation by means of a cannula introduced into the
                               axillary veins. Cannulas also may be placed percutaneously directly into the femoral
                               and subclavian veins. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds:
                               Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                               Philadelphia: 2001.)

                    Table 7.12-2. Benefits and Potential Complications of the Venovenous Bypass System
                    Benefits                                                               Complication
                    Improved hemodynamics during anhepatic phase                           PE
                    ↓ blood loss                                                           Air embolism
                    May improve perioperative renal function.*                             Brachial plexus injury
                                                                                           Wound seroma/infection
                                                                                           Vascular injury
                    *In a prospective randomized trial comparing venovenous bypass with no bypass, no difference was found in the periop renal function between the two
                    groups.

===== PAGE 708 =====
General Surgery   708   c h a p t e r 7.12    Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                          Figure 7.12-5. Standard liver transplantation without venovenous bypass. Venous
                                          return is significantly impaired.

                                deceased donor liver, with the corresponding segment of the vena cava, is used for restoring the continuity of the
                                recipient’s vena cava. The first vascular anastomosis consists of an end-to-end anastomosis of the allograft suprahe-
                                patic vena cava and the cuff of the recipient’s infradiaphragmatic vena cava. This is followed by the reconstruction
                                of the infrahepatic vena cava with an end-to-end anastomosis. Immediately prior to completion of the infrahepatic
                                vena caval anastomosis, the liver is purged with chilled or room temperature albumin and/or crystalloid solution via
                                the allograft portal vein to remove the preservative solution, which may contain high concentrations of potassium
                                (~145 mEq/L K+). In addition, flushing the liver also removes a significant amount of the air that gets introduced
                                during the procurement and preparation of the allograft for transplantation. Finally, the portal vein reconstruction
                                is completed with an end-to-end anastomosis. At this point, the clamps are removed, ending the anhepatic phase
                                of the operation.
                                Venous bypass is not necessary when the piggyback technique of liver transplantation is utilized because the
                                diseased liver is separated from the vena cava (systemic venous return remains unimpaired), and vascular control
                                is obtained by placing a clamp across the confluence of the hepatic veins as they join the vena cava (Fig. 7.12-6). A
                                temporary portocaval shunt may be created to minimize bleeding in cases with severe portal HTN. The first anas-
                                tomosis is between the suprahepatic vena cava of the liver allograft and the cuff created from the hepatic veins. The

===== PAGE 709 =====
Liver Transplantation      709

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                               Figure 7.12-6. Piggyback liver transplantation. Note that the recipient’s vena cava is
                               left intact and systemic venous return is unimpaired.

                   infrahepatic vena cava of the liver allograft is ligated, and the portal vein reconstruction is then completed. The
                   clamps are then removed and the liver is revascularized.
                   The postrevascularization stage of the transplant begins with the removal of the vascular clamps. The reperfusion
                   of the liver may be the most critical part of the operation. Despite flushing the liver to remove the high K+-containing
                   organ preservation solution, hyperkalemia may be troublesome following liver reperfusion, particularly with livers
                   that sustained significant injury during preservation and reperfusion. In addition, massive air embolism is an imme-
                   diate concern following revascularization, as it may quickly lead to cardiac arrest. It is also during this stage that the
                   patient may experience pulmonary HTN, which can lead to right heart failure and severe systemic hypotension. Pul-
                   monary hypertension and right heart failure must be treated aggressively with inotropic agents; otherwise, the liver
                   is subjected to high outflow resistance resulting in congestion and worsening of the allograft preservation injury. The
                   cause of this phenomenon is not well understood; fortunately, it is seen in very few patients. Another reperfusion phe-
                   nomenon is that of systemic hypotension secondary to peripheral vasodilation. This may be due to the release of sys-
                   temic inflammatory mediators, which include kinins, cytokines, and free radicals from the liver allograft. Reperfusion
                   of the liver also can have dramatic effects on coagulation, such as fibrinolysis resulting in severe hemorrhage or hy-
                   percoagulation that can result in venous thrombosis and massive pulmonary embolism with cardiovascular collapse.
                   Immediately prior to revascularization, the patient is usually given methylprednisolone (250–1000 mg) as part of the
                   immunosuppressive regimen, as well as an adjunct to counteract the systemic effects of ischemia-reperfusion injury

===== PAGE 710 =====
710   c h a p t e r 7.12     Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                of the liver. At this point, all of the vascular anastomoses, the peritoneum, and the liver (especially the cut surface in
                                segmental or reduced-size grafts) are inspected for surgical bleeding.
                                The hepatic artery reconstruction is performed after stabilization of the patient following revascularization
                                of the liver. After the hepatic arterial anastomosis is completed, it is important to maintain adequate arterial
                                BP (MAP > 65 mm Hg) to prevent hepatic artery thrombosis. This is especially critical in pediatric transplant
                                recipients, where the hepatic artery diameter ranges from 1–3 mm. The last part of the procedure involves
                                hemostasis, removal of the gallbladder, and reconstruction of the bile duct (Fig. 7.12-7). There are two basic
                                methods for the bile duct reconstruction: an end-to-end anastomosis, with or without a T tube (in patients
                                with normal common bile ducts), or a choledochojejunostomy to a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum (Fig. 7.12-8; in
                                patients with biliary atresia, primary sclerosing cholangitis, or diseased common bile ducts, or when there is
                                a size discrepancy between the donor and recipient common bile duct). In cadaveric or live-donor segmental
                                transplantation, the technique for the recipient’s hepatectomy and the implantation of the allograft is not differ-
                                ent from that of full-size liver transplantation; however, the technique of piggyback liver transplantation must
                                be used with live donors because the allograft segment does not include the vena cava. The anesthesiologist
                                must be alert during the reperfusion of a segmental graft because significant bleeding may ensue from the raw
                                surface of the liver.
                                After the biliary reconstruction is completed and hemostasis has been achieved, a feeding jejunostomy tube and
                                2–3 closed-suction drains may be placed. The position of an OG or NG tube (placed at the beginning of the case) is
                                confirmed and the abdomen is closed.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: ESLD
        General Surgery

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine; arms tucked. Left arm and left groin area out for access to the axillary and femoral
                                                          veins if venous bypass is anticipated.

                                 Incision                 Bilateral subcostal, in children; in adults, incision must extend cephalad to the xiphoid
                                                          process.

                                 Special                  Upper hand or Thompson retractor; venous bypass pump; rapid-infusion system; cell salvage
                                   instrumentation        system; argon beam coagulator, ultrasound.

                                 Unique                   Thrombus or air embolism may occur during removal of clamps from vena cava or with the
                                   considerations         use of venovenous bypass. Right heart failure, ↓ BP, and ↓ SVR may be observed after revas-
                                                          cularization. Continuous AV hemofiltration may be required if renal failure is present. Head and
                                                          extremities should be covered with plastic to maintain core body temperature, particularly in
                                                          children. Gastric tube required.

                                 Antibiotics/drugs        Third-generation cephalosporin or broad-spectrum penicillin/beta lactamase prior to incision.
                                                          Methylprednisolone and antilymphocyte antibody preparations for immunosuppression.

                                 Surgical time            4–12 h

                                 EBL                      6 U average blood loss (range 0–100 U)

                                 Postop care              ICU: 1–2 d. HTN commonly seen.

                                 Mortality                10% at 1 yr

                                 Rejection                10–30% during first yr

                                 Morbidity                Infectious complications: 20–50%
                                                          Biliary stenosis or leaks: 5–15%
                                                          Retransplantation: 6–14%
                                                          Primary graft nonfunction: 2–5%
                                                          Hepatic artery thrombosis: 0–6%
                                                          Portal vein thrombosis: 1–4%

                                 Pain score               7–8

===== PAGE 711 =====
Liver Transplantation     711

                                                                                                                                                              General Surgery
                                Figure 7.12-7. Liver transplantation. Anastomoses—including suprahepatic and
                                infrahepatic IVC, portal vein, hepatic artery, and common bile duct—are complete as
                                shown here. Roux-en-Y loop of small intestine is an alternative biliary drainage conduit.
                                Inset shows a chevron incision with midline extension. (Reproduced with permission
                                from Hardy JD: Hardy’s Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia:
                                1988.)

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Neonate–70 yr

                     Male:Female             1:1

                     Incidence               10/million/yr (15% pediatrics)

                     Etiology                Adult: hepatitis C cirrhosis; alcoholic cirrhosis; primary biliary cirrhosis; primary sclerosing chol-
                                             angitis; hepatitis B cirrhosis; hepatocellular carcinoma. Pediatric: biliary atresia; inborn errors of
                                             metabolism, hepatoblastoma.

                     Associated              Coagulopathy; hypoalbuminemia; ascites; cardiomyopathy (in alcoholic patients, hemochromato-
                       conditions            sis, and Wilson’s disease); hepatorenal syndrome; hepatopulmonary syndrome, portopulmonary
                                             hypertension/GI bleed, hepatic encephalopathy, and hypoglycemia in acute fulminant hepatitis.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients needing liver transplantation represent a formidable challenge to the anesthesiologist. Frequently, these
                   patients present for surgery with multiorgan system failure.

===== PAGE 712 =====
General Surgery   712   c h a p t e r 7.12   Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                         Figure 7.12-8. Liver transplantation (child) using left lateral segment from an adult
                                         liver. The hepatic artery and portal vein are extended with donor iliac artery and vein,
                                         respectively. The final position of the graft is shown (inset). A Roux-en-Y loop of small
                                         intestine is used to drain the bile duct(s). The IVC is left intact. The cut surface of
                                         the liver can bleed excessively if the central venous pressure is too high. (Reproduced
                                         with permission from Broelsch CE, et al: Liver transplantation in children from living
                                         related donors: surgical techniques and results. Ann Surg 1991; 2l4(4):432.)

                                Respiratory            Patients are often hypoxic because of ascites, pleural effusions, atelectasis, V/Q mismatch,
                                                       pulmonary AV shunting, or hepatopulmonary syndrome. As a result, they are usually
                                                       tachypneic and have a respiratory alkalosis. Evidence of pulmonary infection is usually a
                                                       contraindication to surgery, but ARDS that may occur with hepatic failure is not.
                                                       Tests: ABG; PFTs, as indicated. CXR: 3infection, effusions, atelectasis.

                                Cardiovascular         These patients demonstrate a hyperdynamic state with ↑ plasma volume, ↑ CO, and ↓ SVR 2°
                                                       arteriolar vasodilation in the splanchnic circulation, with intense vasoconstriction in other vas-
                                                       cular territories (e.g., renal, brain, muscle, spleen). The SVR usually is not responsive to α-agents.
                                                       AV fistulae may occur across the pulmonary circulation, so that precautions to prevent air em-
                                                       bolism are important. Ejection fraction (EF) is usually high (> 60%), but some patients have cir-
                                                       rhotic cardiomyopathy → ↓ contractility 2° ↓ β-receptors, alterations in myocardial cell mem-
                                                       brane properties, and ↑ myocardial depressant substances. This cardiac dysfunction, however,
                                                       usually is masked by a reduction in afterload. Pericardial effusions may be present and should
                                                       be drained at surgery. Many of these patients will have dysrhythmias, HTN, pulmonary HTN
                                                       (very high risk), valvular disease, cardiomyopathy (alcoholic disease, hemochromatosis, Wilson’s
                                                       disease), and CAD. These patients will require appropriate preop consultation and workup.
                                                       Tests: ECG; stress ECHO: 3EF, contractility, pulmonary HTN, wall motion abnormalities,
                                                       valve problems. If abnormal, right- and left-heart catheterization with coronary artery an-
                                                       giography should be performed.

===== PAGE 713 =====
Liver Transplantation      713

                    Neurological            Patients are often encephalopathic and may be in hepatic coma; however, other organic
                                            causes of coma should be ruled out. In fulminant hepatic failure, ↑ ICP is common, ac-
                                            counting for 40% of mortality (herniation) and may require prompt treatment (mannitol,
                                            hyperventilation, etc.).
                                            Tests: Continuous ICP monitoring in fulminant hepatic failure

                    Hepatic                 Hepatitis serology and the cause of hepatic failure should be determined. Vascular abnor-
                                            malities, previous RUQ surgery or portal-vein decompressive surgery places the patient in
                                            a high-risk group. Albumin is usually low, with consequent low plasma oncotic pressure
                                            → edema, ascites. The magnitude and duration of drug effects may be unpredictable, but
                                            generally, these patients have ↑ sensitivity to all drugs and their actions are prolonged.
                                            Tests: Bilirubin; PT; ammonia level; SGOT; SGPT; albumin

                    Gastrointestinal        Portal HTN, esophageal varices, and coagulopathies ↑ risk of GI hemorrhage. Gastric emp-
                                            tying is often slow and, together with the emergent nature of this surgery, warrants rapid-
                                            sequence induction (see p. B-5). H2-antagonists are indicated preop.

                    Renal                   Renal function ↓, especially in fulminant hepatic failure (hepatorenal syndrome). The kid-
                                            neys often recover after transplantation, but simultaneous kidney transplantation may be
                                            justified. These patients are often hypervolemic, hyponatremic, and possibly hypokalemic.
                                            Ca++ is usually normal. Metabolic alkalosis may be present. Consider preop dialysis and
                                            intraop continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH). CVVH corrects fluid over-
                                            load, acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, and results in the washout of released cytokines
                                            after reperfusion of the graft liver. Mannitol (0.5–1 g/kg) may be used intraop to maintain

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                            renal function.
                                            Tests: BUN; Cr, creatinine clearance; electrolytes; ABG

                    Endocrine               Patients often glucose-intolerant or frankly diabetic, although acute hypoglycemia may be
                                            seen in acute hepatic failure. Hyperaldosteronism may be present.
                                            Tests: Glucose; electrolytes

                    Hematologic             These patients are often anemic 2° either blood loss or malabsorption. Coagulation is im-
                                            paired because of ↓ hepatic synthetic function (all factors except VIII and fibrinogen are ↓),
                                            abnormal fibrinogen production, ↓/impaired Plt, fibrinolysis, and low-grade DIC.
                                            Tests: PT; PTT; Plt count; bleeding time; fibrinogen; fibrin-split products (FSP); TEG

                    Premedication           Low doses of benzodiazepines may be used judiciously, but often nothing is given prior
                                            to surgery. Usually good preop evaluation and discussion suffice. Intramuscular injection
                                            should be avoided. Full-stomach precautions are justified.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA. These patients are extremely complex to manage because of the hemodynamic
                   instability, massive blood loss, coagulopathy, and metabolic problems. It is convenient to divide the operation into
                   three stages: preanhepatic, anhepatic and neohepatic (discussed later).

                    Induction               Often, a narcotic (e.g., fentanyl 2–5 mcg/kg) is given just before induction; and rapid-
                                            sequence induction is preferred. Etomidate (0.3 mg/kg) with succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg),
                                            together with cricoid pressure.

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) with fentanyl 10–50 mcg/kg. A benzodiazepine (e.g.,
                                            midazolam 0.1–0.3 mcg/kg) often is given to ensure amnesia during periods of hemody-
                                            namic instability when the volatile agent may need to be off. N2O is avoided because of bowel
                                            distention and possible air embolism. Ventilation with FiO2 > 0.5 and PaCO2 = ~35 mm Hg.
                                            Occasionally, PEEP (5 cm H2O) is added. Antibiotics and immunosuppressants should be
                                            given per surgeon’s direction. Muscle relaxation usually is maintained with vecuronium.

                    Preanhepatic            The preanhepatic phase starts at skin incision and ends with removal of the recipient liver.
                      phase                 Pleural and pericardial effusions are drained, which may improve oxygenation. Hypergly-
                                            cemia is common during this period. A drop in filling pressures may be 2° hemorrhage or

===== PAGE 714 =====
714   c h a p t e r 7.12   Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                Preanhepatic            vascular compression. Hemorrhage can be severe 2° portal HTN. Coagulation problems
                                  phase (cont’d)        usually increase during this stage, although fibrinolysis is not usually a problem. Blood
                                                        loss replacement is accomplished with blood (PRBC) and FFP. Cryoprecipitate and Plts are
                                                        given as needed, but a hypercoagulable state should be avoided, particularly if venovenous
                                                        bypass is contemplated. Hemodynamic instability is not uncommon during the hepatic
                                                        vascular dissection 2° manipulation of the liver and ↓ venous return.
                                                        Venovenous bypass relieves most of the complications of portal and IVC cross-
                                                       clamping (↓ venous return, low CO, tachycardia, acidosis, ↓ renal function, intesti-
                                                        nal swelling.) Blood is pumped from the femoral vein and the portal system (either
                                                        portal vein or inferior mesenteric) via a centrifugal pump to the right internal jugular
                                                        vein. Generally, no heparin is used, but heparin-bonded cannulas and tubing are used.
                                                       Bypass flow need to be at least 1 L/min to avoid possible thromboembolism. Bypass
                                                        flow depends on venous inflow and is drawn into the pump by negative pressure. Low
                                                        flows may be caused by hypovolemia or obstructed cannulae. Complications include
                                                        unexpected decannulation, thromboembolism, and air embolism, all of which may
                                                        need rapid termination of bypass and treatment of ↓ BP; fibrinolysis is seen with pro-
                                                        longed venovenous bypass.
                                                        Massive blood transfusion is associated with ↓ Ca++, and replacement is usually need-
                                                       ed (± 500 mg/1000 mL of blood/FFP/plasmalyte mixture). If hyperkalemia occurs, it
                                                       should be treated aggressively. Metabolic acidosis > 5 mEq/L should be treated with
                                                       bicarbonate or THAM acetate (tris-hydroxymethyl aminomethane) to avoid a rapid
                                                       increase in sodium. Typical loading dose: mL of 0.3M THAM = lean body weight [kg]
                                                       x base deficit [mmol/L]. Occasionally, inotropic support is needed, but α-adrenergic
        General Surgery

                                                       agents should be avoided because of ↓ renal and peripheral perfusion. UO needs to be
                                                       maintained by ensuring adequate intravascular volume; occasionally mannitol may be
                                                       needed.

                                Anhepatic              The anhepatic phase begins with clamping of the hepatic vessels and vena cava and re-
                                  phase                moval of the liver; it ends with the reperfusion of the donor liver. Problems during this pe-
                                                       riod include hemorrhage, increasing coagulopathy and fibrinolysis, acidosis, hypothermia,
                                                       and ↓ renal function. The hemodynamic instability associated with clamping of the hepatic
                                                       vessels and the congestion of the bowel that occurs can be decreased by venovenous by-
                                                       pass (see the previous text). Care should be taken to maintain intravascular volume, while
                                                       avoiding volume overload, because this would worsen fluid overloading on reperfusion. At
                                                       the completion of vena caval anastomoses, the liver is flushed via the portal vein to remove
                                                       air, preservation fluid, and metabolites. Reperfusion may take place after completion of
                                                       the portal vein anastomosis or after both portal vein and hepatic artery anastomoses are
                                                       completed. As in the preanhepatic phase, acidosis, ↓ Ca++, glucose, coagulation, and other
                                                       electrolyte abnormalities should be treated. Fibrinolysis usually starts in this period, but is
                                                       not usually treated unless severe because of the potential for embolism during venovenous
                                                       bypass.

                                Neohepatic             The neohepatic phase begins with the unclamping of the portal vein, hepatic artery,
                                  phase                and vena cava and reperfusion of the donor liver. Preparation for this phase is important
                                                       because this may be a period of great hemodynamic instability. Before removal of the
                                                       clamps, acidosis should be corrected, ionized Ca++ should be normal, and K+ should be
                                                       < 4.5 mEq/L. CaCl2, NaHCO3, and epinephrine should be readily available. Fluid over-
                                                       load prior to declamping should be avoided. High venous filling pressures decrease hepatic
                                                       perfusion, especially prior to hepatic artery anastomosis. Declamping can be attended by
                                                       ↓ BP, ↓ HR, dysrhythmias, hypothermia, lactic acidosis, coagulopathy, hyperglycemia, and
                                                       thromboembolism.

                                Reperfusion            The “reperfusion syndrome” (which can occur in this phase) is characterized by ↓ HR,
                                  syndrome             ↓ BP (30% of patients develop MAP < 70% of baseline), conduction defects, and ↓ SVR
                                                       in the face of acutely ↑ RV filling pressures. Cause unknown. A rapid ↑ K+ can → cardiac
                                                       arrest. (Rx: ensure normal pH and electrolytes prior to unclamping; rapid therapy when it
                                                       occurs.) ↓ BP and ↓ HR are treated with epinephrine (10 µg increments), whereas CaCl2
                                                       and NaHCO3 are used to correct hyperkalemia and acidosis. Pulmonary edema may occur
                                                       as a result of fluid overload and can be treated with diuretics, inotropes, and phlebotomy.

===== PAGE 715 =====
Liver Transplantation       715

                    Reperfusion        A high venous pressure will cause graft congestion and should be avoided. Reperfusion is
                      syndrome         associated with severe coagulopathy due to fibrinolysis (usually primary), release of heparin,
                      (cont’d)         and hypothermia. As liver function returns, there should be an improvement in coagulation,
                                       acid-base status (metabolic alkalosis may occur), ↓ lactic acidosis, return of glucose to normal,
                                       and bile production. Hypokalemia may occur 2° uptake by the liver. Graft failure is associated
                                       with coagulopathy, ↑ lactic acid, citrate intoxication, hyperglycemia, and ↓ bile formation.

                    Emergence          Extubation is deferred. These patients are generally ventilated postop in ICU until stable
                                       and able to be weaned from ventilatory support. Apart from the usual tests, monitor he-
                                       patic function. Also ensure immunosuppression provided, infection controlled, analgesia
                                       adequate (usually fentanyl), and peptic ulcer prophylaxis given (ranitidine preferred).

                    Blood and fluid    Massive blood loss                           Generally, iv’s are placed in the right antecubi-
                       requirements    IV: 10 Fr × 2                                tal fossa, left IJ or EJ. The right IJ is reserved for
                                       Plasmalyte A or Normosol                     veno venous bypass. Plasmalyte A or Normosol
                                       UO > 1 mL/kg/h                               are preferred (absence of glucose, Ca++, and lower
                                       Warm all fluids                              Na+ content) over NS or LR. Hypernatremia may
                                       Humidify gases                               occur due to administration of NaHCO3. The abil-
                                       Rapid-infusion system                        ity to infuse up to 1.5 L/min of blood should be
                                       Cell salvage system                          available. Usually a mixture of Normosol (250 mL),
                                       20 U PRBC                                    PRBC (1 U), and FFP (1 U) is used, yielding Hct =
                                       20 U FFP                                     26–30%. Actual blood loss estimation is extremely
                                       2 U PLT                                      difficult, and usually replacement is judged by he-
                                                                                    modynamic status, UO, and SvO2. Cell salvage sys-

                                                                                                                                                     General Surgery
                                                                                    tems are used to conserve blood. Anticoagulation
                                                                                    is achieved with citrate solution to avoid heparin
                                                                                    contamination, and cells are washed with Normo-
                                                                                    sol/Plasmalyte A. Discontinue use before biliary
                                                                                    reconstruction (infection) or in neoplasms, hepa-
                                                                                    titis B, or spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. B-1).              Include 5-lead ECG and bladder T. (These pa-
                                       ECG (5-lead)                                 tients sustain significant heat loss.)
                                       Temp-bladder                                 A full-time anesthesia technologist and lab/
                                                                                    blood bank runner are useful. Lab and blood
                                                                                    bank should be notified of the expected trans-
                                                                                    plant. An automated data acquisition system
                                                                                    also is useful because there are times during the
                                                                                    case when record keeping may not be kept up to
                                       ETN2                                         date in favor of providing patient care.
                                       Arterial line(s)                             One or two arterial lines are placed at the outset—
                                                                                    one in the right radial, for ongoing lab and blood gas
                                                                                    sampling; another line, in the right femoral artery
                                                                                    is utilized for continuous pressure measurement.
                                       PA catheter/SvO2/CO                          A PA catheter is essential for management of
                                                                                    hemodynamics in these patients because of the
                                                                                    rapid changes in VS and the fact that a significant
                                                                                    number of patients have recognized or nonrec-
                                                                                    ognized pulmonary hypertension. A catheter ca-
                                                                                    pable of measuring mixed-venous O2 sat is very
                                                                                    useful because it gives early clues to impending
                                                                                    decompensation. Coagulopathy complicates the
                                                                                    placement of central lines, and the use of ultra-
                                                                                    sound-guidance is recommended.
                                       TEE                                          TEE is useful to monitor cardiac filling and func-
                                                                                    tion and to diagnose problems such as PE or air
                                                                                    embolism. Care needs to be taken in placing the
                                                                                    TEE because many of these patients have esoph-
                                                                                    ageal varices.

===== PAGE 716 =====
716   c h a p t e r 7.12   Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                Monitoring             ICP                                   ICP should be measured in patients with fulmi-
                                  (cont’d)                                                   nant hepatic failure if ↑ ICP is a concern.
                                                       Laboratory                            ABG, acid base status, electrolyte, lactate, os-
                                                                                             molality, Ca++, PT, PTT, Plt, Hct—all should be
                                                                                             monitored on a regular basis (hourly or half-
                                                                                             hourly; occasionally, more frequently).
                                                       Thromboelastograph (TEG)              TEG is useful for monitoring coagulation
                                                                                             (see the subsequent discussion of coagulation
                                                                                             management).

                                Coagulation            PT                                    Patients are prone to a variety of coagulopathies
                                  management           PTT                                   (↓ Plt, ↓ coagulation factors, DIC, fibrinolysis,
                                                       Plt counts                            etc.) because of preop factors, massive hemor-
                                                       Fibrinogen                            rhage, anhepatic period, and reperfusion of the
                                                       FSP                                   new liver; therefore, monitoring and treatment
                                                                                             are necessary. Also, states of hypercoagulopathy
                                                                                             need to be avoided because of unheparinized ve-
                                                                                             novenous bypass.
                                                       TEG                                   Although PT, PTT, Plt counts, fibrinogen, and
                                                                                             FSP may provide relevant information, they
                                                                                             may not reflect the true coagulability of patient’s
                                                                                             blood and tend to take considerable time to per-
                                                                                             form. Thus, in some centers, TEG has gained in
        General Surgery

                                                                                             popularity. It measures whole blood coagulabil-
                                                                                             ity, not specific factors. TEG works by measur-
                                                                                             ing viscoelastic properties of blood as it forms
                                                                                             clot (fibrin connections) between a rotating cu-
                                                                                             vette and a spindle. Characteristic patterns are
                                                                                             formed by the various coagulopathies with the
                                                                                             common types shown in Fig. 7.12-9.
                                                                                             Evaluation of the TEG leads to more rational
                                                                                             transfusion therapy, reducing the number of
                                                                                             units of blood products used. Comparing speci-
                                                                                             mens of native whole blood vs blood mixed with
                                                                                             EACA or protamine can guide pharmacologic
                                                                                             therapy of coagulopathies. Table 7.12-3 gives
                                                                                             specific recommendations.

                                Positioning            3 and pad pressure points             Table and arm boards should be very well padded.
                                                       3 eyes                                Head should be placed on a foam rest. Particular
                                                                                             care should be taken to pad the retractor supports
                                                                                             where they may impinge on the arms and on the
                                                                                             radial nerve as it curls around the humerus.

                                Temperature            Warming blanket                       Patient’s arms, head, and legs should be wrapped
                                  control              Humidifier                            in plastic to protect against heat loss. Plastic drapes
                                                                                             and the use of a cesarian section-type drape to
                                                                                             protect the ECG electrodes and direct fluid flow
                                                                                             off the table are useful to prevent the patient from
                                                                                             lying in a pool of fluid. A warming blanket under
                                                                                             the patient and over the lower legs is very useful.

                                Complications          Coagulopathy
                                                       Hemorrhage
                                                       Air embolism
                                                       RV failure
                                                       Metabolic acidosis

===== PAGE 717 =====
Liver Transplantation     717

                                                                                                                                                            General Surgery
                               Figure 7.12-9. Variables and normal values measured by TEG: R = reaction time, 6–8
                               min R + k = coagulation time, 10–12 min α = clot formation rate, > 50° MA = maximum
                               amplitude, 50–70 mm A60 = amplitude 60 min after MA A60/MA-100 = whole blood
                               clot lysis index, > 85% F = whole blood clot lysis time, > 300 min (Reproduced with
                               permission from Kang YG, et al: Intraoperative changes in blood coagulation and
                               thromboelastographic monitoring in liver transplantation. Anesth Analg 1985; 64:891.)

                    Table 7-12-3. Coagulation Therapy Guided by TEG Monitoring
                    1. Maintenance fluid
                      RBC: FFP: Plasmalyte A = 300:200:250 mL
                    2. Replacement therapy
                      a. FFP (2 U) for prolonged reaction time (R > 15 min)
                      b. Plt (10 U) for small MA (MA < 40 mm)
                      c. Cryoprecipitate (6–12 U) for persistent slow-clot formation rate (α < 40°) with normal MA
                    3. Pharmacologic therapy
                      a. Compare coagulability of whole blood, blood treated with protamine sulfate, and blood treated with epsilon aminocaproic
                          acid.
                      b. Epsilon aminocaproic acid (1 g) for severe fibrinolysis (F < 60 min)
                      c. Protamine sulfate (50 mg) for severe heparin effect
                      d. Heparin (1000–2000 U) for hypercoagulable state

===== PAGE 718 =====
718   c h a p t e r 7.12       Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Monitoring                   Serial LFTs                                     Initial LFTs often show very high liver enzymes,
                                  of hepatic                 PT, PTT                                         which subside over a period of days. PT gener-
                                  function                   Ammonia level                                   ally improves to normal levels, while lactic aci-
                                                             Lactate                                         dosis usually corrects quickly. Often a metabolic
                                                             TEG                                             alkalosis follows and may need HCl treatment.
                                                             Bile output

                                Complications                Bleeding                                        This is not a complete list. Feared complications
                                                             Partial vein thrombosis                         that may → graft loss include portal vein throm-
                                                             Hepatic artery thrombosis                       bosis, hepatic artery thrombosis, bile leaks, and
                                                             Biliary tract leaks                             rejection. These are attended by ↑ LFTs, lactic
                                                             Primary nonfunction                             acidosis, coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, ↓ renal
                                                             Rejection Infection                             function, and poor bile formation.
                                                             Pulmonary complication
                                                             HTN
                                                             Electrolyte abnormalities
                                                             (hypokalemia, ↓ Ca++, ↑ Na)
                                                             Alkalosis
                                                             Renal failure
                                                             Peptic ulceration
                                                             Neurologic
        General Surgery

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Adachi T: Anesthetic principles in living-donor liver transplantation at Kyoto University Hospital: experiences of 760 cases.
                                     J Anesth 2003; 17(2):116–24.
                                  2. Grande L, Rimola A, Cugat E, et al: Effect of venovenous bypass on perioperative renal function in liver transplantation:
                                     results of a randomized controlled trial. Hepatology 1996; 23:1418–28.
                                  3. Merritt WT: Metabolism and liver transplantation: review of perioperative issues. Liver Transpl 2000; 6(4 Suppl 1):S76–84.
                                  4. Nakazato PZ, Concepcion W, Bry W, et al: Total abdominal evisceration: an en bloc technique for abdominal organ harvesting.
                                     Surgery 1992; 111:37–47.
                                  5. Shaw BW, Martin DJ, Marquez JM, et al: Venous bypass in clinical liver transplantation. Ann Surg 1984; 200:524–34.
                                  6. Starzl TE, Demetris AJ: Liver transplantation: a 31-year perspective, Part III. Curr Probl Surg 1990; 27:181–240.
                                  7. Starzl TE, Iwatsuki S, Esquivel CO, et al: Refinements in the surgical technique of liver transplantation. Semin Liver Dis 1985;
                                     5:349–59.
                                  8. Warnaar N, Mallett SV, de Boer MT, et al: The impact of aprotinin on renal function after liver transplantation: an analysis of
                                     1,043 patients. Am J Transplant 2007; 7(10):2378–87.
                                  9. Washburn WK, Lewis WD, Jenkins RL: Percutaneous venovenous bypass in orthotopic liver transplantation. Live Transpl
                                     Surg 1995; 1(6):377–82.

                                LIVING-DONOR LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: The success of deceased donor liver transplantation has resulted in an ever-increasing number of pa-
                                tients with end-stage liver disease (ESLD) waiting for transplantation; however, the number of deceased donors has
                                remained relatively constant. Consequently, the waiting time to receive an organ has increased significantly, and ~15%
                                of patients will die while waiting. The success of living-donor renal transplantation, coupled with the experience in
                                adult-to-pediatric living-donor liver transplantation, as well as advances in surgical and postsurgical care of patients
                                undergoing major liver resections, has lead to the implementation of adult-to-adult living-donor liver transplantation.
                                Potential living liver donors undergo extensive medical and psychosocial evaluation to ensure psychological as well as
                                physical fitness to undergo a major surgical procedure that provides no medical benefits to the donor. Donors must
                                have full blood typing to ensure compatibility with the recipient and then fill out an extensive medical questionnaire,
                                followed by a complete physical exam and screening lab tests. Any evidence of diabetes, HTN, or renal, pulmonary,

===== PAGE 719 =====
Living-Donor Liver Transplantation      719

                   cardiovascular, or hepatic abnormalities usually is a contraindication to donation. After the potential donor is medically
                   and psychosocially cleared, they undergo a detailed magnetic resonance imaging study of the liver to assess liver seg-
                   ment size, anastomosis, and possible anatomical contraindications.
                   The donor and recipient operations are usually conducted simultaneously to minimize the ischemic injury to the
                   donor liver segment. The donor operation, however, is initiated first, with the recipient operation commencing only
                   after the donor liver has been directly examined and no unforeseen anatomic barriers to donation are found. The
                   living donor operation is similar to a right or left hepatic lobectomy undertaken for hepatic disease, although there
                    are some differences that can have a significant impact on anesthetic management.
                   The donor may elect to have an epidural catheter for postop analgesia, and this usually is placed before surgery. Living
                   donor liver resection has been successfully performed laparoscopically; however, due to limited experience and utiliza-
                   tion of this technique, it will not be detailed here. A vertical midline incision is made from the xiphoid to just above the
                   umbilicus and extended transversely to the right anterior axillary line. Occasionally, bisubcostal incisions are required.
                   Following exploration of the abdomen, intraoperative ultrasound may be performed to map the hepatic venous anatomy
                   so the plane of resection can be delineated. In addition, an intraoperative cholangiogram is performed via the cystic duct
                   (a cholecystectomy is performed in either right or left hepatic lobectomy) or the common bile duct, to define the bili-
                   ary anatomy. After this is performed, the corresponding portal vein and hepatic artery are isolated. Unlike in a hepatic
                   lobectomy for tumor, the venous and arterial inflow to the liver segment is not ligated; thus, the transaction of the liver
                   parenchyma may result in significant hemorrhage. The respective lobe of the liver is mobilized from its attachments, and
                   the liver is dissected from the retrohepatic vena cava, with ligation of the short-hepatic veins. This maneuver can cause
                   transient hypotension secondary to torque and compression of the IVC and hepatic veins, as well as potential bleeding
                   from the vena cava itself. Next, the hepatic vein is isolated, and the liver parenchyma is then divided, which can be a slow
                   and tedious process. Following division of the hepatic parenchyma, the liver segment is ready to be removed. Heparin

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                   (80–100 U/kg) is given to prevent intrahepatic clot formation. Following heparinization, the hepatic artery and portal vein
                   are ligated and divided, followed by the hepatic vein. The donated hepatic lobe is immediately placed in ice and flushed
                   with organ preservation solution. Once the donated liver segment has been removed, the abdomen and cut surface of the
                   remaining liver are inspected for hemostasis and bile leak. Closed drains are placed, after which the abdomen is closed.
                   Essentially, the same procedure is followed for a left lateral segmentectomy (adult-to-child), except that the amount of
                   donor liver removed is about 25%, compared with 40% and 60% for a left or right hepatic lobectomy, respectively.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Healthy, living liver donor

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine; arms tucked

                     Incision                Vertical midline with a right and/or left subcostal extension, depending on liver segment being
                                             utilized. Laparoscopic or laparoscopically assisted technique described.

                     Special                 Retractor; laparoscopic or laparoscopically assisted technique described ultrasonic or hydrojet
                       instrumentation       dissection/aspirator; irrigating bipolar cautery; argon beam coagulator; Cell salvage system;
                                             rapid-infusion system

                     Unique                  Intraop cholangiogram and/or ultrasound. Hemodilution immediately before surgery, with removal
                       considerations        of 1 U whole blood if Hct ≥ 40. Patients also may have donated 1–2 U of autologous blood.
                                             Heparin (80–100 U/kg)

                     Antibiotics             Ampicillin 1 g and ceftriaxone 1 g iv before skin incision

                     Surgical time           3–5 h

                     EBL                     250–500 mL

                     Postop care             ICU overnight or surgical floor. Hospital stay 5–7 d.

                     Mortality               34 deaths reported world-wide (as of August 2010) following ~11,553 donor operations.

                     Morbidity               Infectious complications: 15%
                                             Biliary leak: 8%
                                             Reoperation: 3–5%
                                             Acute hepatic failure: < 0.1%

                     Pain score              7–9

===== PAGE 720 =====
720   c h a p t e r 7.12      Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range                 18–55 yr

                                 Male:Female               1:1

                                 Incidence                 Uncommon

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthesia for Hepatic Resection, p. 567.

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Abecassis MM, Fischer RA, Olthoff KM, et al: Complications of living donor hepatic lobectomy—A comprehensive report.
                                     Am J Transpl 2012; 12(5):1208–17.
                                  2. Baker TB, Jay CL, Ladner DP, et al: Laparoscopy-assisted and open living donor right hepatectomy: a comparative study of
                                     outcomes. Surgery 2009; 146(4):817–23.
                                  3. Barr ML, Belghiti J, Villamil FG, et al: A report of the Vancouver Forum on the care of the live organ donor: lung, liver,
                                     pancreas and intestine data and medical guidelines. Transplantation 2006; 81:1373–85.
                                  4. Cheah YL, Simpson MA, Pomposelli JJ, et al: The incidence of death and potentially life threatening “near miss” events in
                                     living donor hepatic lobectomy: a world-wide survey. Liver Transpl 2012 Nov 21 (epub ahead of print).
                                  5. Singer PA, Siegler M, Whitington PF, et al: Ethics of liver transplantation with living donors. N Eng J Med 1989; 321:620–2.
        General Surgery

                                MULTIORGAN PROCUREMENT
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: The families of brain-dead patients may allow donation of the patient’s functioning organs—which
                                may include, but is not limited to, heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, pancreas, and small intestine. The process of organ pro-
                                curement can be chaotic, with multiple operative teams and technicians working simultaneously. Moreover, brain-
                                dead patients may be hemodynamically unstable, sometimes requiring multiple pressors, and the possibility of acute
                                decompensation is ever present.
                                The donor patient’s chest and abdomen are opened in the midline from sternal notch to pubis (Fig. 7.12-10). The chest
                                is opened with a sternal saw, and generally an extra-large Balfour retractor is used to widely retract the abdomen. The
                                aorta and IVC are dissected first to allow rapid placement of a flush line in the event that the patient experiences a car-
                                diovascular collapse. Following this, the liver vasculature is identified in the hepatoduodenal ligament and is dissected
                                out. This part of the procedure generally takes about 1.5 h. In cases where the pancreas is procured, an additional
                                45–60 min is required for mobilization of the pancreas. During pancreas procurement, a Betadine/amphotericin
                                B solution is administered through an NG tube into the stomach and duodenum. A total of about 300–500 mL of the
                                Betadine solution is passed in two divided aliquots. After the heart, liver, pancreas, and kidneys have been mobilized,
                                the supraceliac aorta just below the diaphragm is dissected for placement of the aortic cross-clamp. Immediately
                                before cross-clamping, 30,000 U of heparin (300 U/kg) is given systemically, with the α-antagonist phentolamine in
                                some cases. The supraceliac aorta is then clamped, and the organs are perfused with an organ preservation solution.
                                At this point, the ventilator can be turned off, except in cases where the lungs are procured. The lungs must be inflated
                                with 100% O2 just before removal. The heart is the first organ to be removed, followed by the lungs.
                                If the lungs are procured, an extra 20–30 min of perfusion time is required. After removal of the heart and/or lungs,
                                the liver can be removed, followed by the pancreas, small intestines, and kidneys. After the organs are removed,
                                spleen and lymph nodes for tissue typing are obtained from the abdominal and thoracic cavities; and because of the
                                possible need for vascular reconstruction in the recipients, bilateral iliac veins and arteries are removed. The total
                                time for multiorgan procurement is ~4 h, although the anesthesia time typically ends with aortic cross-clamping.

===== PAGE 721 =====
Multiorgan Procurement        721

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                               Figure 7.12-10. A complete midline incision, from suprasternal notch to pubis, is
                               made for multiple organ procurement; and the sternum is split. If necessary, cruciate
                               abdominal incisions are added to facilitate exposure of the intraabdominal organs.
                               (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles
                               and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                   Variant procedures: During the “rapid-flush” technique used by some procurement teams, the dissection of indi-
                   vidual abdominal organs is minimized and an en bloc resection is done after clamping the aorta below the diaphragm
                   and flushing preservation solution through the distal aorta. The en bloc organs are then dissected ex vivo, often at
                   the transplant center, in preparation for transplantation. This technique is more rapid, requiring only about 1.5 h.
                   A second variant procedure, developed in response to the chronic shortage of transplantable organs, is the use of
                   non-heart-beating donors. Patients, who are not brain-dead, but who have no hope of recovery (due to irreversible
                   brain injury or pulmonary or cardiac failure), may be suitable donors. In this case, the patient is taken to the OR and,

===== PAGE 722 =====
722   c h a p t e r 7.12     Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                under the supervision of a physician who is not part of the transplant team, the life-sustaining treatment (e.g., pres-
                                sors, ventilator) is D/C’d. When it has been determined that the donor has suffered cardiac death, the body is rapidly
                                cooled with ViaSpan through a cannula that is located in the aorta at the level of the renal arteries. Depending on
                                the regional regulations, this cannula may be placed before cardiac death or immediately following the declaration of
                                cardiac death. After the preservative flush is initiated, the abdomen is entered as rapidly as possible, the peritoneal
                                cavity is packed with ice, and the organs are removed expeditiously. The anesthesiologist’s role is ended when cardiac
                                death has been declared. The disadvantage of this approach is that there can be significant warm ischemia from the
                                time the life-sustaining treatment is stopped to the time that cardiac death is reached.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Brain death

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                Midline only, neck to pubis, ± bilateral transverse extensions

                                 Special                 Chest and abdominal retractors
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Maintain oxygenation and BP as if live patient. May require pressors and/or blood transfusion.
                                   considerations        Temporarily deflate lungs for sternal sawing.

                                 Antibiotics             Ampicillin (1 g iv), ceftriaxone (1 g iv); Betadine/Amphotericin B via NG tube for pancreas (with
                                                         duodenal segment) procurement.

                                 Surgical time           4 h; rapid-flush technique: 1.5 h
        General Surgery

                                 EBL                     200 mL

                                 ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Age range               Neonate–70 yr

                                 Male:Female             N/A

                                 Incidence               Approximately 5000/yr in the United States.

                                 Etiology                Usually head trauma (e.g., motor vehicle accidents, gunshot wounds to the head) or intracranial
                                                         bleeding

                                 Associated              Vasomotor instability; diabetes insipidus; intracranial HTN
                                   conditions

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                In general, organ donors are previously healthy individuals who have suffered catastrophic, irreversible brain injury
                                of known etiology, most commonly due to blunt head trauma, penetrating head injury, or intracranial hemorrhage.
                                A declaration of brain death by physicians not participating in the organ procurement must be documented. This
                                documentation, together with certification of death and familial consent, should be verified by the anesthesiologist
                                before organ procurement. The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) has produced The Critical P            athway
                                for the Organ Donor to facilitate the administrative aspects of organ procurement (http://www.unos.org/docs/
                                Critical_Pathway.pdf ). There should be no evidence of disease or trauma involving the organs targeted for donation,
                                and in general, the patient should be hemodynamically stable with minimal inotropic requirements. After brain
                                death has been declared, it is important to shift the emphasis away from cerebral resuscitation efforts and to focus
                                instead on the maintenance of adequate tissue perfusion and oxygenation. Brain death is frequently followed by a
                                series of pathophysiological events that may complicate the management of these patients.

===== PAGE 723 =====
Multiorgan Procurement        723

                   Recently, Donation after Cardiac Death (DCD) has been instituted at many medical centers, where a non-brain-
                   dead patient is brought to the operating room for withdrawal of life support and subsequent removal of organs for
                   transplant. Although the ethics of such organ donation had been debated, the ASA and other organizations have de-
                   veloped protocols to separate the teams caring for the patient during the withdrawal of life support and the operating
                   room team responsible for organ retrieval. However, in most institutions, an anesthesiologist is present in the operat-
                   ing room as a member of the latter team (http://webinars.asahq.org/session.php?id=4047). After withdrawal of life
                   support has been initiated and the patient meets criteria for cessation of cardiopulmonary function, organ removal is
                   initiated as quickly as possible to limit warm ischemia time and possible damage to the organs to be removed. DCD
                   patients often do not have as serious pathophysiological alterations as patients who meet brain-death criteria.

                    Respiratory              Pulmonary dysfunction following brain death has many possible etiologies: aspiration, at-
                                             electasis, pneumonia, and pulmonary edema. In addition, trauma may cause pulmonary
                                             dysfunction related to contusion, pneumothorax, or hemothorax. Meticulous pulmonary
                                             toilet is essential to prevent atelectasis and pneumonia. Maintenance of adequate oxygen-
                                             ation is requisite to ensure preservation of other organs for transplantation. Use mechani-
                                             cal ventilation with TVs of 8–10 mL/kg and a minute ventilation that maintains PaCO2
                                             30–35 mm Hg and pH 7.35–7.45. The FiO2 should ensure a PaO2 75–150 mm Hg and
                                             arterial saturation > 95%. PEEP usually is applied at 3–5 cmH2O and should not exceed
                                             7.5 cmH2O because of the deleterious effects on CO and regional blood flow and possible
                                             barotrauma. The FiO2 generally should be increased to 100% before transport to the OR.
                                             An important exception is in the case of heart-lung or lung retrieval, where it is important
                                             to maintain FiO2 < 40% to minimize possible effects of O2 toxicity. Ideally, PIP should be
                                             < 30 cmH2O to minimize possible barotrauma to the lungs.

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                                             Tests: Frequent ABGs, including immediate preop period. Proper position of the ETT
                                             should be confirmed preop.

                    Cardiovascular           Hypotension should be anticipated in all organ donors. This results most commonly from
                                             neurogenic shock (derangement of descending vasomotor control → progressive ↓ SVR and
                                             venous pooling) and hypovolemia. Hypovolemia is usually the result of dehydration therapy
                                             for cerebral edema, hemorrhage, DI, or osmotic diuresis 2° hyperglycemia. Hypothermia,
                                             LV dysfunction, and endocrine abnormalities also can contribute to ↓ BP. Fluid resuscita-
                                             tion with crystalloid, colloid, and PRBCs to maintain Hct > 30% should be initiated preop.
                                             Hemodynamic goals are (1) CVP 10–12 cmH2O (6–8 cmH2O if lungs are to be procured);
                                             (2) MAP between 60–100 mm Hg; (3) SBP > 100 mm Hg; (4) PCWP ≤ 12 mm Hg; (5) SVR
                                             800–1200 dynes/second × cm−5 (or 800–1200 woods units); and (6) UO > 1 mL/kg/h. Do-
                                             nors are often placed on inotropic therapy to maintain these parameters; however, following
                                             adequate volume resuscitation, preop inotropic therapy often may be gradually decreased
                                             or D/C’d. If inotropic therapy remains necessary, typically it would consist of dopamine
                                             (2–10 mcg/kg/min), followed by dobutamine (3–15 mcg/kg/min) or epinephrine (0.1–1.0
                                             mcg/kg/min), then norepinephrine. The latter 3 agents may be combined with dopamine
                                             (2–3 mcg/kg/min) in an attempt to augment or preserve renal, mesenteric, and coronary ar-
                                             terial blood flow. It should be noted that brain death may be accompanied initially by a tran-
                                             sient hypertensive crisis that may require short-term treatment with SNP and/or esmolol.
                                             ECG abnormalities are common in patients with intracranial injury and are of no pathologic
                                             consequence. Atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias and various degrees of conduction block
                                             occur frequently in organ donors; the etiology may be electrolyte imbalance, ABG distur-
                                             bance, ↑ ICP, loss of the vagal motor nucleus, inotropic therapy, hypothermia, or myocardial
                                             contusions or ischemia. Antidysrhythmic therapy should follow the usual guidelines except
                                             for ↓ HR, which is resistant to atropine in this setting. Bradycardia, if accompanied by ↓ BP,
                                             should be treated with isoproterenol, dopamine, epinephrine, or temporary cardiac pacing.
                                             Tests: ECG; ECHO (to assess wall motion abnormalities) and possibly coronary angiogra-
                                             phy (if CAD is suspected).

===== PAGE 724 =====
724   c h a p t e r 7.12    Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                Neurological             Diabetes insipidus (DI) frequently occurs in brain-dead donors; it is likely the result of
                                                         destruction of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Untreated, it may cause marked hypovo-
                                                         lemia and electrolyte disturbances (↑ Na+, ↑ Mg++, ↓ K+, ↓ PO–4, ↓ Ca++). Therapy with iv
                                                         vasopressin (titrated from 2 mcg/kg/min) or DDAVP (titrated from 0.3 mcg/kg/min) often
                                                         is initiated to maintain UO < 1.5–3 mL/kg/h. Many believe that the benefits of minimizing
                                                         electrolyte imbalance, fluid shifts, and reduction of core T outweigh the risks of vasopres-
                                                         sin or desmopressin therapy, including coronary and renal vasoconstriction and possible
                                                         organ ischemia or uneven distribution of the preservation solutions during flushing. It may
                                                         be prudent, however, to D/C vasopressin or DDAVP infusions for at least 1 h prior to aor-
                                                         tic cross-clamping and infusion of preservation solutions. Thermoregulation is abnormal
                                                         in brain-dead donors due to hypothalamic dysfunction, and core T should be monitored
                                                         (bladder, or esophageal). Aggressive warming techniques may have to be employed early
                                                         to maintain a core T > 34–35°C, as there are numerous undesirable consequences of sig-
                                                         nificant hypothermia (< 32°C) in the organ donor (e.g., cardiac dysrhythmia, cardiac insta-
                                                         bility, ↓ GFR and cold diuresis, a left shift in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, and
                                                         pancreatitis). Although other endocrine or metabolic disturbances may exist as a result of
                                                         destruction of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, currently there is no consistent recommen-
                                                         dation for any other hormonal replacement therapy.
                                                         Tests: Serum electrolytes and osmolality every 4 h

                                Hematologic              Donors may be anemic from hemodilution and/or hemorrhage. To ensure adequate tissue
                                                         O2 delivery, PRBCs are transfused to maintain Hct > 30. Some donors may exhibit a co-
                                                         agulopathy; clinically significant bleeding should be treated with clotting factors and Plts.
        General Surgery

                                                         Persistent or severe primary fibrinolysis or DIC may require rapid transfer of the donor to
                                                         the OR for organ retrieval. Administration of epsilon-aminocaproic acid to treat fibrinoly-
                                                         sis is avoided for fear of microvascular thrombosis in the donor organs.
                                                         Tests: Hb/Hct; PT; PTT; Plt count; DIC screen as clinically indicated

                                Other                    The role of oxygen-free radicals, with regard to reperfusion injury, has prompted the sug-
                                                         gested use of mannitol and steroids (and other compounds) as scavengers.

                                    INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: Although anesthesia is unnecessary in brain-dead organ donors, both visceral and somatic
                                reflexes can lead to physiologic responses during the procedure. The goals of intraop management with regard to
                                respiratory, cardiovascular, hematologic, and neurologic status are identical to those discussed under preop consid-
                                erations earlier.

                                Induction                 Settings for mechanical ventilation parallel those of the ICU, although it may be advisable
                                                          to begin with an FiO2 of 100% until the first ABG result is obtained. The exception is when
                                                          procurement of the lungs or heart-lungs is anticipated; then FiO2 should not exceed 40%.
                                                         To eliminate reflex neuromuscular activity and to facilitate surgical retraction, a longer
                                                         acting neuromuscular blocking agent should be given at the beginning of the procedure
                                                         and supplemented as necessary.

                                Maintenance              Reflex hypertensive responses to surgical stimulation occur frequently and may → exces-
                                                         sive intraop blood loss and damage to donor kidneys; management should include the
                                                         weaning of vasopressors and the initiation of vasodilator therapy with isoflurane, SNP, or
                                                         NTG. Anesthetic care continues until the proximal aortic cross-clamp is applied. D/C all
                                                         monitoring and supportive therapy at this point. The notable exception is the case of heart-
                                                         lung or lung procurement; in this situation, all monitoring except FiO2 should cease with
                                                         proximal aortic cross-clamping. All supportive care is terminated, with the exception of
                                                         mechanical ventilation of the lungs at 4 breaths/min or as directed by the transplant team
                                                         and suctioning of the ETT after cessation of mechanical ventilation just prior to removal
                                                         of the tube. Extubation marks the termination of anesthetic care of the heart-lung or lung
                                                         donor.

===== PAGE 725 =====
Multiorgan Procurement         725

                    Blood and fluid    IV: 14–16 ga × 1–2                Significant 3rd-space losses may require large vol-
                       requirements    NS/LR @ 2–4 mL/kg/h               umes of crystalloid, colloid (up to 1 L) and PRBCs
                                                                         (not uncommon to transfuse 2 or more U to main-
                                                                         tain Hct > 30). Central venous access is necessary for
                                                                         monitoring and for vasoactive drug delivery.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see p. B-1).   If a PA catheter is in place, it may be used or re-
                                       Art line                          moved based on concerns of catheter-related, right-
                                       CVP line                          side endocardial lesions. Rarely is insertion of a PA
                                       UO                                catheter warranted in these operations. ABG, Hb/
                                                                         Hct, serum electrolytes, and glucose should be
                                                                         monitored hourly; for operations involving pro-
                                                                         curement of lungs or heart-lungs, ABGs should be
                                                                         obtained at least every 30–60 min.

                    Complications      Hypotension                       Most commonly 2° hypovolemia and neurogenic
                                                                         shock (loss of descending vasomotor control). En-
                                                                         sure adequate volume repletion as described previ-
                                                                         ously, then institute or increase inotropic/vasopres-
                                                                         sor therapy as previously outlined.
                                       Dysrhythmias                      Multiple possible etiologies as described previously.
                                                                         Standard treatment and diagnosis should be em-
                                                                         ployed, with the exception of bradycardia, which is at-
                                                                         ropine-resistant and should be treated with isoproter-

                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                                                                         enol, dopamine, epinephrine, or transvenous pacing.
                                       Cardiac arrest                    CPR should be instituted in an effort to maintain
                                                                         the viability of the liver, kidneys, and other abdomi-
                                                                         nal viscera intended for transplantation. Procure-
                                                                         ment of the liver and kidneys should proceed rap-
                                                                         idly to aortic cross-clamping at the diaphragm and
                                                                         administration of cold preservation fluid into the
                                                                         aorta and portal vein. This series of events will un-
                                                                         doubtedly preclude use of the heart and lungs for
                                                                         transplantation.
                                       Oliguria                          Ensure adequate volume replacement and BP as
                                                                         outlined, then add dopamine (2–3 mcg/kg/min), if
                                                                         not previously instituted to promote renal vasodila-
                                                                         tion and to increase renal blood flow, glomerular fil-
                                                                         tration rate, and UO. If these measures are ineffec-
                                                                         tive at restoring adequate UO (> 1 mL/kg/h), then
                                                                         furosemide or mannitol may be used, after consul-
                                                                         tation with the transplant team.
                                       Diabetes insipidus (DI)           Fluid and electrolyte therapy as determined by fill-
                                                                         ing pressures and hourly serum electrolyte values.
                                                                         Adjustment of vasopressin or DDAVP infusion to
                                                                         maintain UO < 1.5–3.0 mL/kg/h; initiation of this
                                                                         infusion should be done in consultation with the
                                                                         transplant team. As previously discussed, it may be
                                                                         advisable to D/C vasopressin or DDAVP at least 1 h
                                                                         before aortic cross-clamping.
                                       Coagulopathy                      Transfuse Plt, FFP, and cryoprecipitate as necessary
                                                                         for clinical bleeding in the setting of abnormal co-
                                                                         agulation studies. Avoid EACA due to risk of micro-
                                                                         vascular thrombosis in the donor organs.
                                       Hyperglycemia                     Avoid dextrose-containing solutions, which may
                                                                         aggravate existing hyperglycemia and contribute to
                                                                         osmotic diuresis and electrolyte abnormalities.

===== PAGE 726 =====
726   c h a p t e r 7.12    Liver/Kidney/Pancreas Transplantation

                                Complications             Hypothermia                              Early aggressive attempts to minimize intraop heat
                                  (cont’d)                                                         loss are essential and include warming the OR, use
                                                                                                   of a forced-air warming blanket, insulating exposed
                                                                                                   areas, warming all fluids, and using heated, humidi-
                                                                                                   fied inspired gases.

                                Special                   Heart-lung procurement                   Division of the mediastinal pleura and tracheal dis-
                                  considerations                                                   section with manipulation of each lung outside the
                                                                                                   mediastinum may result in ↓↓ BP and may cause
                                                                                                   problems with oxygenation and ventilation. Ad-
                                                                                                   equate intravascular volume is essential, and ino-
                                                                                                   tropic therapy may be required during this period.
                                                                                                   Problems with ventilation and oxygenation must
                                                                                                   be communicated immediately to the transplant
                                                                                                   team. Following aortic cross-clamping and infusion
                                                                                                   of cardioplegia solution, the lung preservation fluid
                                                                                                   will be infused via the right and left PAs. During
                                                                                                   this period, the lungs should be ventilated manually
                                                                                                   with 4 bpm, or as otherwise directed by the trans-
                                                                                                   plant team. It is prudent early on in the procure-
                                                                                                   ment procedure to verify the position of the ETT
                                                                                                   with the transplant surgeon to ensure that the tube
                                                                                                   does not contribute to mucosal injury at the site of
        General Surgery

                                                                                                   the anticipated suture line.
                                                          Organ preservation                       Therapy aimed at improving organ preservation
                                                                                                   may require several pharmacologic manipulations,
                                                                                                   as directed by the transplant team. Agents common-
                                                                                                   ly used during organ procurement include dopa-
                                                                                                   mine (2–3 mcg/kg/min), furosemide, mannitol, al-
                                                                                                   lopurinol (free-radical scavenger), chlorpromazine
                                                                                                   and phentolamine (vasodilators), heparin (prevents
                                                                                                   microvascular thrombosis and promotes reperfu-
                                                                                                   sion), and PGE1 (vasodilator, membrane stabilizer,
                                                                                                   antiplatelet effect). Systemic infusion of PGE1 prior
                                                                                                   to aortic cross-clamping (commonly used in heart-
                                                                                                   lung or lung procurement) will lead to predictable
                                                                                                   and profound ↓ BP; efforts at volume resuscitation
                                                                                                   toward optimal CVP should continue until the aor-
                                                                                                   tic cross-clamp is applied. If heparin is to be admin-
                                                                                                   istered iv, a catheter should be used after verifying
                                                                                                   the ability to freely aspirate blood. Methylpredniso-
                                                                                                   lone (30 mg/kg) is commonly administered at least
                                                                                                   2 h before organ retrieval in an effort to protect the
                                                                                                   heart and kidneys from ischemic injury.

                                Suggested Readings
                                 1. Bernat JL, D’Alessandro AM, Port FK, et al: Report of a National Conference on Donation after Cardiac Death. Am J
                                    Transplant 2006; 6:281–91.
                                 2. Fanelli V, Mascia L: Anesthetic optimization for non-heart-beating donors. Curr Opin Anaesth 2010; 23:406–10.
                                 3. Mandell MS, Hendrickse A: Donation after cardiac death. Curr Opin Organ Transplant 2007; 12:298–302.
                                 4. Powner DJ, Kellum JA, Darby JM: Abnormalities in fluids, electrolytes, and metabolism of organ donors. Prog Transplant
                                    2000; 10(2):88–94.
                                 5. Van Norman GA: Another matter of life and death: what every anesthesiologist should know about the ethical, legal and
                                    policy implications of the non-heart-beating cadaver organ donor. Anesthesiology 2003; 98:763–73.

===== PAGE 727 =====
c h a p t e r

                          7.13 Trauma Surgery

                                        surgeons
                                        Daniel J. Riskin, MD
                                        David A. Spain, MD
                                        Ronald Jou, MD

                                        anesthesiologist
                                        Charles C. Hill, MD

===== PAGE 728 =====
INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND AIRWAY MANAGEMENT FOR
                                TRAUMA SURGERY
                                    initial assessment
                                The Advanced Trauma Life-Support (ATLS) Program, developed by the Committee on Trauma American College of Sur-
                                geons, provides a safe and reliable method for the immediate treatment of injured patients. The crucial components of
                                ATLS are the rapid and accurate assessment of a patient’s condition, the resuscitation and stabilization of the patient ac-
                                cording to a sequence of priorities, determining the need for and arranging interhospital transfer, and ensuring optimal care
                                throughout the entire process. The initial assessment and management consists of the primary survey and resuscitation.
                                During the primary survey, life-threatening conditions are identified and treated following the ABCDE sequence.
                                Airway patency should be assessed while maintaining cervical spine protection. In situations when a patient’s airway
                                integrity is unclear or at risk, a definitive airway should be established. Breathing and ventilation are assessed, paying
                                attention to any chest injuries that can impair adequate gas exchange. Conditions such as tension pneuomothorax,
                                massive hemothorax, flail chest, and open pneumothorax should be identified and treated. Supplemental oxygen should
                                be delivered and oxygenation should be monitored with pulse oximetry. Circulation is assessed, and shock, if present,
                                should be recognized. In trauma, the presence of shock is usually due to hemorrhage, and definitive control of bleed-
                                ing and replacement of intravascular volume are crucial. Disability from neurologic injury should be assessed. Patients
                                with severe neurologic injury may require definitive airway management or urgent neurosurgical evaluation. Exposure
                                involves undressing the patient to identify any other life-threatening injuries while keeping the patient warm.
        General Surgery

                                EXTENDED FOCUSED ASSESSMENT WITH SONOGRAPHY FOR TRAUMA
                                (eFast)
                                An ultrasound screening examination of the trauma patient that allows for the rapid detection of pericardial fluid (peri-
                                cardial tamponade), pneumothorax, hemothorax, and peritoneal free-fluid can speed triage and treatment of trauma
                                patients. It is important to note that many injuries cannot be detected by ultrasound (e.g., bowel perforations, torn
                                diaphragm), and that eFast examinations have a small but significant false negative rate. Ultrasound is not a substitute
                                for more definitive diagnostic procedures.

                                       AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
                                In trauma, indications for definitive airway can be divided into conditions that require airway protection and condi-
                                tions that require control of ventilation or oxygenation. Airway patency can be compromised by obtundation, severe
                                facial injuries, bleeding or vomiting, or obstruction from neck or airway injuries. The need for ventilation or oxygen-
                                ation is indicated by apnea, respiratory distress, severe closed head injury, or hemodynamic instability.
                                Although airway management in injured patients does not differ fundamentally from airway management in other
                                situations, attention must be paid to cervical spine protection, high risk of vomiting and aspiration, and recognition
                                of maxillofacial, neck, laryngeal, or head injuries that can cause airway compromise.
                                Airway maneuvers such as the chin-lift or jaw-thrust maneuver are useful techniques to improve airway patency in
                                unconscious or obtunded patients, although they must be performed without extending the neck and potentially
                                exacerbating a cervical spine injury.
                                Airway adjuncts such as oropharyngeal airway, nasopharyngeal airway, or laryngeal mask airway are useful for providing
                                temporary ventilation and oxygenation until a definitive airway (oral or nasal ETT or surgical airway) can be established.
                                Oraltracheal intubation, with the use of appropriate neuromuscular blockade and cricoid pressure, is the preferred
                                technique. The approach is rapid, but at least three people are required to perform it safely in the patient with sus-
                                pected C-spine injury.
                                In-line stabilization of the neck is performed to minimize neck and spine movements. Because a failed intubation may
                                force operative airway intubation, equipment for cricothyrotomy should be immediately accessible. Fiberoptic assis-
                                tance and other techniques for endotracheal intubation including video laryngoscopy may be used in the stable patient
                                with a difficult airway. Patients in respiratory distress with severe facial or neck trauma or unstable cervical spine injury
                                require a surgical airway. An airway placed in transport should be immediately assessed for position and changed to a
                                definitive airway when appropriate.
                          728

===== PAGE 729 =====
Initial Assessment and Airway Management for Trauma Surgery             729

                                             A

                                             B

                                                                                                                                                    General Surgery
                               Figure 7.13-1. Cricothyrotomy (vertical skin incision not shown). A: Identification
                               of the cricothyroid membrane by palpation and incision of the membrane transversely.
                               B: Insertion of a tracheostomy tube or ETT through the cricothyroid membrane,
                               which is spread with a tracheal dilator. (Redrawn with permission from Greenfield LJ,
                               Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice, 2nd
                               edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 1997.)

                   Nasotracheal intubation, used only in spontaneously breathing trauma patients, can be performed without the
                   use of pharmacologic agents or special equipment. It is, however, associated with higher incidence of vomiting and
                   aspiration. In the intoxicated patient with a depressed level of consciousness, the success rate may be as low as 65%.
                   Blind nasal intubation is contraindicated in patients with unstable midface fractures, penetrating neck trauma, or
                   significant neck hematomas.
                   Cricothyrotomy (Fig. 7.13-1) is the preferred method in adults who require a surgical airway. The important ana-
                   tomic landmarks of the superior and inferior borders of the thyroid and cricoid cartilages are palpated. The thyroid
                   cartilage is then stabilized, a vertical skin incision is made, and the ETT or tracheostomy tube is rapidly advanced
                   through subcutaneous tissue. The cricothyroid membrane lies very superficially, covered only by the skin and platysma
                   muscle. The cricothyroid membrane is incised transversely with the scalpel. In emergency situations, a standard
                   small-caliber ETT is generally easier to insert than a tracheostomy tube (Fig. 7.13-1B). Cricothyrotomies should be
                   converted to tracheotomies within 72 h after the initial injury, provided the patient’s condition permits.

===== PAGE 730 =====
730   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                A tracheostomy is indicated for patients requiring surgical airway in less emergent situations or if a cricothyrotomy
                                cannot be performed due to direct laryngeal injury. A tracheostomy can be accomplished through the same inci-
                                sion, extended caudally, if laryngeal injury is found (see p. 728). Rarely, the injury is in the distal cervical or proximal
                                intrathoracic trachea. In such cases, it may be necessary to intubate the distal end of the airway through the wound.
                                A subsequent median sternotomy may be required to expose the injury. Right thoracotomy provides access to the
                                distal intrathoracic trachea (see Chest Trauma, p. 737).
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Airway compromise

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine

                                 Incision                 Midline longitudinal incision in the neck

                                 Unique                   The large number of legal claims involving failed intubation suggests that surgical cricothyrotomy
                                   considerations         remains an underutilized technique.

                                 Antibiotics              Usually not given until clear indications related to the primary injury are apparent.

                                 Surgical time            2 min

                                 EBL                      Minimal

                                 Postop care              Mechanical ventilation

                                 Mortality                Related to the primary injury
        General Surgery

                                 Morbidity                Cricothyrotomy is more likely to result in airway stricture or damage to more proximal structures
                                                          in the larynx. On this basis, cricothyrotomy is converted to tracheostomy within 48–72 h of
                                                          admission if patient’s general condition permits.

                                 Pain score               3

                                EMERGENCY TUBE THORACOSTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: In the United States, trauma is the most common cause of death in young people; 25% of these deaths
                                (~16,000 per year) are the result of thoracic trauma. Most of these are due to lethal injuries at the scene (e.g., cardiac
                                rupture, free aortic transection). For patients who reach the hospital, proper management is crucial because many
                                deaths can be prevented. Early deaths are due to airway obstruction, tension pneumothorax, massive hemothorax,
                                flail chest, cardiac tamponade, and open pneumothorax. Later deaths are due to respiratory failure, sepsis, and
                                unrecognized injuries.
                                Eighty percent of blunt thoracic injuries are caused by motor vehicle collisions (MVCs). Penetrating injuries to the
                                chest are almost as common as blunt trauma. The death rate in hospitalized patients with isolated chest injury is
                                4–8%; this increases to 10–15% when one other organ system is involved and to 35% if multiple additional organs
                                are injured. Eighty-five percent of chest injuries do not require thoracotomy, and the patient can be managed with
                                relatively simple measures, such as airway control, tube thoracostomy, and pain management. Blunt trauma can
                                induce injury by three distinctive mechanisms: direct blow, deceleration injury, and compression injury. Rib frac-
                                ture is the most common sign of blunt thoracic trauma. Fracture of the upper ribs (1st–3rd), clavicle, or scapula
                                implies high-energy impact and is associated with a higher likelihood of major vascular injury.
                                Life-threatening injuries caused by penetrating trauma are distinctly different from those caused by blunt trauma.
                                In penetrating chest injuries, pneumothorax is almost always present, and hemothorax is present in 80% of cases.
                                Hemodynamic instability in penetrating chest injury generally heralds a major intrathoracic vascular injury.
                                Tension pneumothorax may be caused by blunt or penetrating trauma. Venous return to the heart is impaired
                                by the increased intrathoracic pressure and compression of the vena cava → ↓ BP resulting in distended neck
                                veins. Loss of lung volume on the ipsilateral side and subsequent compression of the contralateral side leads to

===== PAGE 731 =====
Emergency Tube Thoracostomy       731

                   impaired ventilation and hypoxia. The diagnosis of tension pneumothorax is made clinically. The presence of respi-
                   ratory distress and absent or diminished breath sounds warrant immediate needle decompression (14–16-ga cath-
                   eter through the 2nd intercostal space, midclavicular line), followed by subsequent tube thoracostomy. Treatment
                   should not be delayed for radiographic confirmation. In the hemodynamically stable patient, however, suspicion of
                   a pneumothorax should be confirmed by x-ray. On the CXR, a 20% loss of lung dimension corresponds to ~50% loss
                   of lung volume. A small, simple pneumothorax (< 10%) with no respiratory compromise may be observed. These pa-
                   tients require close observation in the hospital and a repeat CXR in 4–6 h. Tube thoracostomy should be performed
                   for a large pneumothorax (> 10%), for patients with respiratory compromise or multiple injuries, or when it is not
                   possible to adequately monitor the patient (e.g., during extended transport). Recent developments in emergency
                   ultrasonography have led to the adoption of the “eFAST” examination, which includes ultrasound examination of
                   the anterior chest to detect pneumothoraces. An abnormal eFAST exam may alert the team to the presence of a
                   significant pneumothorax even before a CXR can be obtained. In the presence of an anterior pneumothorax, the
                   eFAST may even be superior in sensitivity to a supine CXR.
                   As much as 40% of the circulating blood volume can accumulate in a hemothorax. The most frequent sources of bleed-
                   ing are the intercostal and internal mammary vessels. Some degree of hemothorax is present in almost every patient
                   with chest injury. A supine CXR may miss up to 1 L of blood. Although an upright CXR is more sensitive, this is gen-
                   erally impractical in a multiple-trauma patient (whose spine often has not been fully evaluated). Following chest tube
                   placement, blood loss > 1200–1500 mL or an ongoing loss of 250 mL/h for 4 h suggest the need for surgical intervention.
                   Simple pneumothorax without associated hemothorax can be treated with a 20–22 Fr chest tube placed in the
                   4th intercostal space in the midaxillary line or in the 5th intercostal space in the anterior axillary line. Hemothorax
                   and tension pneumothorax require a large-bore, 28–36 Fr chest tube placed in the midaxillary line through the 5th
                   intercostal space (Fig. 7.13-2). A 20-mL syringe with 1% lidocaine can be used not only to provide local anesthesia,

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                   but also to locate the upper edge of the rib in the obese patient. A generous 3-cm incision should be made one
                   interspace below the targeted level. The subcutaneous tissues are dissected bluntly, creating a tunnel that is directed

                                                                                     4
                                                                                 5

                                                 Neurovascular
                                                    bundle

                                                                                                      Incision

                                                                                         Rib 4             Lung

                                                               Rib 5

                                                                           Parietal         Pleural
                                                                           pleura           space
                                                      Intercostal
                                                       muscles

                               Figure 7.13-2. Tube thoracostomy. Incision through 4th or 5th interspace at anterior
                               axillary line. Forceps are used to tunnel over the superior edge of the rib and to bluntly
                               enter the pleural space.

===== PAGE 732 =====
732   c h a p t e r 7.13     Trauma Surgery

                                upward. The pleural space should be entered just above the upper edge of the rib to avoid injury to the intercostal
                                neurovascular bundle, located just below the lower edge of the rib. After the pleural space has been entered bluntly, it
                                should be explored with the operator’s finger swept around to ensure proper location and to free potential adhesions.
                                The chest tube should be inserted and advanced in the posterior and superior direction. The tube then should be con-
                                nected to a suction/collection system under 20 cm of water-negative pressure, preferably through an autotransfusion
                                device. Repeat chest exam and CXR should immediately follow chest tube placement to evaluate decompression
                                and assess for other injuries. If the pleural space still contains blood, another chest tube could be inserted or video-
                                assisted thoracoscopy (VAT) could be considered if major vascular injury is not suspected.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Tension pneumothorax; pneumothorax; hemothorax

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine with arm abducted 90°

                                 Incision                3 cm in interspace below 5th intercostal space in midaxillary line

                                 Special                 38–40 Fr chest tube should be used in most patients. Small, 20–22 Fr tube reserved for simple
                                   instrumentation       pneumothorax in stable patients. Autotransfusion device should be available in ED.

                                 Unique                  In tension pneumothorax, a large-bore needle inserted in the 2nd intercostal space of the midcla-
                                   considerations        vicular line can relieve tension and save a patient’s life.

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time           5 min
        General Surgery

                                 EBL                     Minimal from tube placement. Variable amounts drained out, depending on extent of hemothorax
                                                         and associated injuries.

                                 Postop care             Chest tube may be removed after at least 48 h, when there is no air leak from lung and < 100–
                                                         150 mL of fluid drainage per 24 h.

                                 Mortality               Isolated chest injury: 4–8%
                                                         When one other organ system is involved: 10–15%
                                                         When two or more organ systems involved: > 35%

                                 Morbidity               Clotted hemothorax
                                                         Empyema
                                                         Lung abscess
                                                         Lung contusion

                                 Pain score              5

                                EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT THORACOTOMY
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Rarely, emergency department thoracotomy may offer the only chance of survival in highly selected
                                trauma patients. Its use should be restricted largely to patients who show signs of life in the emergency department
                                (ED) but lose such signs shortly thereafter. The usual indications are (a) massive exsanguination in the left chest,
                                usually due to cardiac, vascular, or pulmonary injuries and (b) pericardial tamponade. For patients with penetrating
                                cardiac injuries who show signs of life in the ED, survival may be as high as 15%. For blunt trauma in this setting,
                                survival is < 1%, regardless of presentation. With either mechanism, functional survival is almost unprecedented if
                                the patient arrives without vital signs and unreactive pupils.
                                A left anterolateral thoracotomy is the preferred approach because pericardiotomy, open cardiac massage, and
                                aortic occlusion are best achieved by this means. This incision can be extended easily across the sternum and into
                                 the right chest to improve exposure and to control massive blood loss and/or air embolism from the right lung. The
                                 entire chest is prepped liberally, and left anterolateral thoracotomy is performed rapidly in the 5th intercostal space

===== PAGE 733 =====
Exploratory Surgery for Neck Trauma          733

                   using a large-blade scalpel. Heavy scissors can be used to quickly divide the intercostal muscles and to cut across the
                   sternum. If pericardial tamponade is encountered, the pericardium is opened longitudinally, anterior to the phrenic
                   nerve. Blood and clot are evacuated and bleeding sites controlled with gentle digital pressure. Large, full-thickness
                   lacerations that extend into the chambers may be controlled by inserting a Foley catheter, inflating the balloon, and
                   pulling it snug against the myocardium. The open end of the Foley can be clamped or used as an infusion line for
                   resuscitation. During ED thoracotomy, placement of clamps on the atria or ventricles should be avoided as they may
                   extend the laceration. Attempts to repair cardiac lacerations should be delayed until resuscitative measures have
                   been completed. In the nonbeating heart, suturing is performed prior to defibrillation. If coronary or systemic air
                   embolism is present, the appropriate hilum is cross-clamped and air is aspirated from the left ventricle through the
                   elevated apex. Cardiac arrest is an indication for immediate internal massage. The two-hand method is preferred, and
                   internal defibrillation should be instituted. If internal defibrillation does not restore proper cardiac activity, cross-
                   clamping of the aorta will improve coronary perfusion. To cross-clamp the aorta, the left lung is retracted anteriorly
                   and superiorly, and the posterior pleura is dissected under direct vision. An orogastric or nasogastric tube placed in
                   the esophagus aids in the identification of the esophagus by feel, allowing for cross-clamping of the aorta without
                   risking injury to the adjacent esophagus.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Penetrating chest trauma with cardiac arrest and recent recorded signs of life

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Supine

                     Incision                Left anterolateral thoracotomy. Extension of incision across sternum could be considered for
                                             improved exposure.

                                                                                                                                                           General Surgery
                     Special                 ED thoracotomy tray; internal defibrillator paddles; suction device; Foley catheter; rapid-infusion
                       instrumentation       device; O(–) blood

                     Unique                  Airway should be secured first. OG/NGT tube should be placed if possible. Typically, patients are
                       considerations        not anesthetized for this procedure.

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           10 min

                     EBL                     1–2 L

                     Postop care             ICU

                     Mortality               Blunt trauma: 98%
                                             All penetrating chest injuries requiring ED thoracotomy: 85%
                                             Penetrating cardiac injury: 50%

                     Morbidity               Arrhythmias
                                             Acute MI

                     Pain score              10

                   EXPLORATORY SURGERY FOR NECK TRAUMA
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The neck contains vital structures in a relatively unprotected region of the body (Fig. 7.13-3). The
                   cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, endocrine, and CNS systems are all represented in the neck; injury to any of
                   these can be fatal.
                   Injuries to the neck may result from blunt or penetrating trauma. In blunt trauma, < 5% of cases will have C-spine
                   injuries. Because the consequences are so grave, however, all patients should be evaluated for C-spine injuries (H&P,
                   x-rays, CT), and full spinal precautions should be maintained until the C-spine is cleared. Blunt airway injuries can

===== PAGE 734 =====
734   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                be devastating and present significant management difficulties; however, the majority of blunt neck trauma consists
                                of minor soft-tissue injuries that can be managed nonoperatively. Blunt cerebrovascular injuries can occur from a
                                direct blow to the cartoid or vertebral arteries, or from a severe hyperextension or rotation mechanism.
                                Penetrating neck trauma is defined as penetration of the platysma muscle. For these injuries, the neck is usually divided
                                into three horizontal zones (Fig. 7.13-3, inset). Zone I extends from the sternal notch to the cricoid cartilage. Penetrating
                                injuries in this area are associated with a high mortality. Zone II extends from the cricoid cartilage to the angle of the
                                mandible. Because this is the most exposed region of the neck, injuries can be evaluated and explored using standard
                                operative techniques. Zone III extends from the angle of the mandible to the base of the skull. Because of anatomic
        General Surgery

                                          Figure 7.13-3. Cervical structures contained in Zones I, II, and III: (1) facial artery;
                                          (2) esophagus; (3) internal carotid artery; (4) external carotid artery; (5) thyroid
                                          cartilage; (6) sympathetic trunk; (7) vagus nerve; (8) cricothyroid membrane; (9)
                                          cricoid cartilage; (10) thyroid cartilage; (11) common carotid artery; (12) subclavian
                                          artery; (13) right innominate vein; (14) SVC; (15) ascending aorta; (16) descending
                                          aorta; (17) PA; (18) subclavian vein; (19) clavicle; (20) brachial plexus; (21) IJ vein; (22)
                                          vertebral artery; (23) phrenic nerve; (24) submandibular gland; (25) lingual artery;
                                          (26) hypoglossal nerve; (27) parotid gland and duct; (28) facial nerve and its branches;
                                          (29) maxillary artery; (30) sternal manubrium. The thoracic duct is not shown in this
                                          figure. (Adapted with permission from Ordog GJ, et al: J Trauma 1985; 25:238). (Inset
                                          reproduced with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery. Lippincott
                                          Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 735 =====
Exploratory Surgery for Neck Trauma              735

                   constraints, injuries to Zones I and III can be difficult to identify and repair. In patients with a Zone I injury, iv access
                   should be established in the contralateral upper extremity because of the possible injury to the ipsilateral internal jugular
                   vein or subclavian vein.
                   Until recently, evaluation and management of stable patients with neck injuries that penetrated the platysma depended
                   on location of injury. Injuries to Zones I and III were evaluated radiographically, whereas injuries to Zone II were
                   indications for mandatory exploration. With the increased availability of CT and arteriography, however, a selective
                   exploration strategy is now favored. The presence of so-called hard signs, including airway compromise, shock, active
                   bleeding, an expanding hematoma, an evolving stroke, or extensive subcutaneous air generally mandate operative
                   exploration. “Soft signs,” which include hoarseness, hemoptysis, hematemesis, dysphagia, or prominent ecchymosis,
                   can be evaluated with CT and endoscopy.
                   Management of hemodynamically unstable or symptomatic patients with penetrating neck injuries should be lim-
                   ited to applying direct pressure, protecting the airway, establishing iv access, and obtaining a CXR. Exploration and
                   definitive management of the injury in the OR should follow as soon as possible. In stable patients with penetrating
                   injuries and no indications for exploration, CT is generally the first diagnostic test.
                   A median sternotomy incision may be used for patients with right-neck Zone I injuries or if injuries to the medias-
                   tinum involving the innominate artery or right subclavian artery are suspected. Exposure of injuries to the proximal
                   left subclavian artery is extremely difficult via median sternotomy. In this case, a left anterior thoracotomy is pre-
                   ferred. The chest and left arm should be prepped and draped to allow arm manipulation.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Penetrating neck injury

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

                                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                     Position                Supine with head turned away from side of exploration and neck extended. If both sides of neck
                                             require exploration, head should be in midposition. It is helpful to clear the C-spine before exploration.

                     Incision                Sternocleidomastoid anterior border

                     Unique                  Monitor BP and HR carefully during carotid sinus manipulation.
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv. If pharyngoesophageal injury: ampicillin 1 g and gentamicin 80 mg iv.

                     Surgical time           1h

                     Closing                 Wound requires drainage, especially in Zone I exploration and if esophagus or airway was
                       considerations        violated.

                     EBL                     Variable

                     Postop care             ICU 12–24 h for neurologic and airway monitoring. After carotid injury repair, angiography should
                                             be considered.

                     Mortality               1%

                     Morbidity               Hemorrhage: acute from injuries; delayed from pseudoaneurysms
                                             Airway injury: acute loss of airway; delayed tracheal stenosis
                                             Damage to neural or vascular structures
                                             Esophageal fistula

                     Pain score              4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Typically young adult

                     Etiology                Typically male

                     Incidence               5–10% of all trauma involves neck structures.

                     Associated              Intrathoracic injuries; spinal cord injuries; recurrent laryngeal nerve injury; phrenic nerve injuries;
                       conditions            thoracic duct injury

===== PAGE 736 =====
736   c h a p t e r 7.13     Trauma Surgery

                                ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR
                                NECK TRAUMA SURGERY
                                     PREOPERATIVE
                                Patients with neck injuries often present unique challenges for ET intubation. Extensive internal damage may be
                                present despite minimal external signs. High-velocity deceleration events, or “clothesline” injuries, are often
                                
                                associated with airway compromise. Vascular injuries, particularly involving the carotid artery, can markedly dis-
                                 tort internal anatomy and prevent visualization of laryngeal structures or passage of an ETT. Known or suspected
                                 C-spine injuries will restrict optimal positioning of the head and neck for laryngoscopy. Facial or dental injuries may
                                 impede access for laryngoscopy because of limited mouth opening or the presence of blood in the oropharynx. The
                                 use of alternative methods to secure the airway (e.g., fiberoptic bronchoscopy or video laryngoscopy) or a surgical ap-
                                 proach may be the safest option. Equipment for a surgical airway should be available prior to attempting ET intubation.

                                Airway                    Preop assessment of the airway and nature and extent of the cervical injury is crucial. Stri-
                                                          dor and hoarseness may be present with laryngeal injury or compression of the trachea.
                                                          Assess patient’s ability to talk as a part of the airway evaluation. C-spine injury (though
                                                          not common with penetrating neck injuries) should be evaluated by x-ray or CT scan. Air-
                                                          way injury can be associated with subcutaneous emphysema or pneumothorax. The extent
                                                          of mouth opening, dental injuries, and any distortion of internal and external structures
                                                          due to tissue swelling or hematoma should be determined before intubation. The CXR
                                                          or CT should be examined carefully for evidence of tracheal deviation compression or
        General Surgery

                                                          pneumothorax.
                                                          Tests: x-ray; CT scan; ABG

                                Cardiovascular            The patient should be evaluated for the extent of blood loss (eFAST results, BP, HR, capil-
                                                          lary refill, peripheral pulse, skin condition). In addition to vascular injuries, associated facial
                                                          and dental injuries may result in significant occult blood loss accumulated in the stomach.
                                                          Venous lacerations can allow air embolism.

                                Neurological              Deficits associated with acute compromise of cerebral arterial blood flow should be evalu-
                                                          ated on physical exam. Damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve can occur, resulting in
                                                          changes in voice and ↑ aspiration risk. C-spine injuries should be assessed by physical
                                                          exam (neck pain, neurologic examination) and radiologic studies (lateral C-spine x-rays
                                                          [including C-7] CT scan, MRI).

                                Premedication             Full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5).

                                     INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA

                                Induction                 The induction technique will depend on the associated injuries and physical exam. In the
                                                          hypovolemic patient, induction doses of propofol should be reduced by 50–75% to mini-
                                                          mize ↓↓ BP. Consider etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg) or ketamine (0.5–1 mg/kg iv) as alterna-
                                                          tive induction agents. A rapid-sequence iv induction with cricoid pressure is usually re-
                                                          quired. In the presence of a vascular injury, the cough reflex and the BP response to intuba-
                                                          tion should be suppressed (e.g., remifentanil 1 mcg/kg iv), in addition to induction agents,
                                                          to prevent expansion of the hematoma. A wide range of ETT sizes (5.0–8.0 mm) should be
                                                          available. If C-spine injury is suspected, in-line stabilization of the patient’s head and neck
                                                          should be provided by an assistant. In the presence of an unstable C-spine, cricoid pres-
                                                          sure may be associated with further injury. If a difficult intubation is anticipated, fiberoptic
                                                          intubation (see p. I-2), video laryngoscopy, or an awake surgical airway (cricothyrotomy
                                                          or tracheotomy) should be considered. In patients with penetrating neck injuries; “blind”
                                                          intubation techniques should be avoided.

===== PAGE 737 =====
Chest Trauma: Pericardial Window, Release of Tamponade, Repair of Cardiac Laceration                         737

                    Maintenance                Standard maintenance (p. B-3) is usually appropriate for the normotensive neck-trauma
                                               patient. In cases of vascular injury, careful control of BP in the low normal range is advan-
                                               tageous. When nerve testing is anticipated, either no muscle relaxation or a short-acting
                                               agent (e.g., mivacurium) should be used.

                    Emergence                  Postop intubation and mechanical ventilation is prudent in patients with residual neurologi-
                                               cal deficits or oropharyngeal swelling. BP control at low normal levels and slight elevation
                                               of the head of the bed (10–20°) will help to resolve tissue edema. Awake extubation is the
                                               goal in patients with minimal distortion of the airway at the conclusion of the procedure.

                    Blood and fluid            IV: 14–16 ga × 2                            Blood transfusion may be necessary with vascular
                       requirements            NS/LR @ 4–6 mL/kg/h                         injuries.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1).             Invasive monitoring may be indicated for patients
                                               ± Arterial line                             with major vascular injuries; however, the placement
                                                                                           should not delay the start of emergency surgery.

                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                   With suspected or known C-spine injuries, stabili-
                                               3 eyes                                      zation of the head and neck in the neutral position
                                                                                           is required.

                    Complications              Awareness
                                               Hypothermia

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                                General Surgery
                    Complications              Hemorrhage                                  BP control at low normal levels (SNP infusion,
                                               Hematoma                                    labetalol, NTG) and elevation of the head of the
                                               Airway compromise                           bed (10–20°) will help minimize tissue edema and
                                                                                           hematoma formation, which could lead to airway
                                                                                           compromise.

                    Pain                       See p. C-1.
                      management

                    Tests                      As indicated.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma: Advanced trauma life support for doctors. In Student Course Manual,
                        9th edition. American College of Surgeons, Chicago: 2012.
                     2. Dutton RP, McCunn M, Grissom TE.: Anesthesia for trauma. In: Miller RD, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edition, Vol 2.
                        Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2010, 2277–312.
                     3. Hemmila MR, Wahl WL. Management of the injured patient. In: Doherty GM, ed. Current Diagnosis and Treatment Surgery.
                        McGraw-Hill Medical, New York: 2010.
                     4. Mattox KL, Moore EE, Feliciano DV, eds.: Trauma, 7th edition. McGraw Hill, New York: 2012.

                   CHEST TRAUMA: PERICARDIAL WINDOW, RELEASE OF
                   TAMPONADE, REPAIR OF CARDIAC LACERATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Cardiac contusions may occur in patients with blunt chest trauma. The degree of injury varies from
                   localized contusion to cardiac rupture, but most are clinically insignificant if the patient survives to the hospital.
                   Autopsy studies of victims of immediately fatal accidents show that as many as 65% have rupture of one or more cardiac

===== PAGE 738 =====
738   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                chambers, and 45% have pericardial lacerations. Most of the patients with cardiac rupture die at the scene; however,
                                survivors are reported if vital signs are present during transport. Early clinical findings in cardiac contusion are most
                                commonly dysrhythmias, but occasionally patients can develop cardiac failure. The initial ECG in the ED is the most
                                sensitive diagnostic test. The most common abnormalities are atrial arrhythmias and right bundle branch block. S     erial
                                cardiac monitoring is indicated only if the initial ECG is abnormal. Serum enzymes are not helpful. Management
                                is symptomatic. Arrhythmias should be treated in the standard fashion and are not a contraindication to surgery.
                                In the presence of blunt cardiac injury, hemodynamic abnormalities mandate echocardiographic examination
                                to evaluate for structural lesions such as valve or myocardial rupture. Pericardial lacerations from stab wounds tend to
                                seal and cause tamponade, present in 80–90% of patients with stab wounds to the heart. Accumulation of 150 mL of blood
                                in the pericardium may impair preload and cause shock. Beck’s triad of distended neck veins, muffled heart sounds, and
                                ↓ BP is present in only 30% of patients with tamponade. Pulsus paradoxus is even less reliable. The diagnostic test of
                                choice is ultrasound, performed in the ED as part of the focused assessment by sonography for trauma (eFAST) exam.
                                Treatment of penetrating cardiac injuries has gradually changed from initial management by pericardiocentesis to
                                prompt thoracotomy and pericardial decompression. Pericardiocentesis, with ultrasound guidance, may be used
                                to stabilize a patient until sternotomy or thoracotomy can be performed. A subxiphoid pericardial window is an
                                option, but is best performed in the OR.
                                Gunshot wounds (GSWs) can produce extensive myocardial damage, multiple perforations, and massive bleeding
                                into the pleural space. Hemothorax, shock, and exsanguination occur in nearly all cases of cardiac GSWs. Pericardial
                                tamponade is often absent. Hemodynamically stable patients with penetrating injuries close to the heart should have
                                ECHO evaluation in the ED only if equipment is immediately available. The presence of pericardial fluid should be eval-
                                uated with a eFAST scan. If a hemopericardium is confirmed, blood should be evacuated and injury treated in the OR.
                                Patients who are stable enough to be transported to the OR have excellent prognosis with reported survival of 97%
        General Surgery

                                for stab wounds and 71% for GSWs. In contrast, patients who require ED thoracotomy have only a 15% survival rate
                                for penetrating injuries.
                                Subxiphoid pericardial window under local or GA: The entire chest is prepped for potential sternotomy. A vertical
                                midline incision is made over the xiphoid process and upper epigastrium. The xiphoid is elevated or excised, allowing
                                access to the pericardiophrenic membrane and anterior mediastinum. The pericardium is opened between two stay
                                sutures and inspected for the presence of blood. With the use of eFAST scanning, this diagnostic test is most useful
                                when the patient is already undergoing an exploratory laparotomy and there is a suspicion for a cardiac injury. If
                                blood is present, a median sternotomy should be performed.
                                Median sternotomy provides excellent exposure to the heart, great vessels, and pulmonary hila. This approach is
                                ideal for anterior injuries and for the unstable patient, but is less well suited for posterior injuries and left subclavian
                                injuries.
                                Left anterior/anterolateral thoracotomy in the 5th intercostal space can be used in the stable patient or in the
                                newly unstable ED patient with penetrating injury. The pericardium is opened anterior to the phrenic nerve, and
                                tamponade is relieved. The bleeding heart is controlled with digital occlusion, and the laceration is closed with mat-
                                tress sutures, with care being taken not to occlude coronary flow. Small coronary branches can be ligated, whereas
                                others should be repaired and may even require CPB.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Cardiac laceration

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine, L arm abducted 90°

                                 Incision                 Median sternotomy or left anterior or anterolateral thoracotomy in 5th intercostal space. (See
                                                          Fig. 7.13-4.) Further exposure may be obtained by transsternal extension into the R chest.

                                 Special                  Rapid-infusion device; active rewarming system; internal defibrillator
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   Massive blood loss is expected on opening pericardium and during repair of laceration. Large-
                                   considerations         bore peripheral lower extremity iv and central venous access are recommended for monitoring
                                                          of volume replacement. A Foley catheter can be used to occlude laceration and as access for
                                                          infusion. Arrhythmias are common.

===== PAGE 739 =====
Chest Trauma: Pericardial Window, Release of Tamponade, Repair of Cardiac Laceration   739

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           45 min

                     Closing                 Hypothermia and coagulopathy contribute to mortality.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     1–2 L

                     Postop care             ICU

                     Mortality               Without tamponade: ~90%
                                             With tamponade: ~30%

                     Morbidity               Overall: 85%
                                             Pulmonary complications
                                             Acute MI
                                             Arrhythmias
                                             Intracardiac shunts
                                             Ventricular aneurysms
                                             Valvular lesions
                                             Retained foreign bodies

                     Pain score              8

                                                                                                                                         General Surgery
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Usually young adult

                     Etiology                GSWs, stab wounds, blunt trauma

                     Associated              Hemothorax; pneumothorax; great-vessel injury; lung contusion
                       conditions

                                Figure 7.13-4. Incision (dashed/solid line) for ED thoracotomy: made immediately
                                below the nipple, extending from sternum as far laterally as possible. (Reproduced
                                with permission from Baker RJ, Fischer JE: Mastery of Surgery. Lippincott Williams &
                                Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

===== PAGE 740 =====
740   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                See Anesthetic Considerations for Chest Trauma, p. 743.

                                CHEST TRAUMA: REPAIR OF GREAT VESSELS
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                Description: Thoracic great vessel injury accounts for 8–9% of all vascular injuries seen in the trauma center.
                                The subclavian artery and descending thoracic aorta are the vessels injured most often (21% of cases), followed by
                                pulmonary artery (16%), subclavian vein (13%), vena cava (11%), and innominate artery and pulmonary veins (9%).
                                Rupture of the thoracic aorta is the most lethal injury following blunt chest trauma and causes up to 50% of fatalities in
                                MVCs. Proposed mechanism of injury is a deceleration force causing flexion or torsion of the aortic arch and subsequent
                                disruption of the aortic wall at the ligamentum arteriosum immediately distal to the left subclavian artery. Survival of
                                the patient depends on retention of the hematoma by the adventitial layer of the aorta. The mechanism of injury and the
                                mediastinal silhouette on CXR are the two most sensitive markers for an injured thoracic aorta. Depressed left mainstem
                                bronchus, apical capping, and a deviated trachea or esophagus (OG/NT tube) seen on CXR may be suggestive of aortic in-
                                jury. CT angiogram of the chest has high sensitivity and is the preferred modality of evaluation in most trauma centers as a
                                screening test. Arteriography is the gold standard for evaluating aortic injuries and may also allow therapeutic intervention.
                                Smaller dissections in blunt trauma may be managed in the ICU with tight control of heart rate and systolic blood
        General Surgery

                                pressure. Injuries requiring operative intervention are traditionally managed with thoracotomy and graft interposi-
                                tion. Newer endovascular techniques are increasingly used as an adjunct to surgery or for definitive repair. Investiga-
                                tion of these techniques is ongoing.
                                Ascending aorta: Rupture requires median sternotomy, CPB, and repair with a Dacron graft. Penetrating injury to
                                the anterior aspect of the aorta can be repaired primarily; if there is additional posterior injury, CPB is required for
                                successful repair.
                                Aortic arch: Complete exposure of the great vessels is required; median sternotomy with extension to the neck and
                                division of the innominate vein may be utilized. Complex injuries may require CPB.
                                Innominate artery, right carotid artery: Approach is via a median sternotomy with right cervical extension
                                and division of the innominate vein, if necessary. Blunt trauma typically involves the proximal innominate artery, in
                                contrast to penetrating trauma, which usually involves the distal portion of the artery near the carotid or subclavian
                                bifurcation. Injuries are repaired using an interposition graft of Dacron or Gore-Tex. Because cerebral perfusion is
                                maintained through the L carotid and subclavian arteries, shunting is not necessary.
                                Descending thoracic aorta: 97% of patients with great-vessel injury who arrive alive at the hospital will have an
                                injury at the isthmus. Clamping and direct reconstruction are required under temporary bypass shunt or pump-assisted
                                shunt. Left posterolateral thoracotomy via the 4th intercostal space is the preferred access. Distal control of the descend-
                                ing aorta is obtained first; then the transverse aortic arch is exposed and umbilical tape is applied between L carotid and
                                L subclavian arteries. Vascular clamps are applied at the proximal aorta, distal aorta, and subclavian artery. Graft inter-
                                position is utilized in 85% of the cases. An aortic cross-clamp time of < 30 min minimizes the incidence of paraplegia.
                                Subclavian artery or vein: Approach is via a cervical extension of the median sternotomy for right-sided injuries.
                                Exposure of injuries to the proximal, left, subclavian artery via median sternotomy is usually inadequate. In patients
                                with such injuries, a high left thoracotomy, often with either a supraclavicular or trap-door incision, is needed. Graft
                                interposition is often necessary.
                                Pulmonary artery and veins: In major hilar injury, a pneumonectomy may be necessary, despite high mortality.
                                Cross-clamping of the hilum prevents air embolus and hemorrhage. Simultaneous cross-clamping of the vessels and
                                bronchus may reduce mortality in those patients requiring pneumonectomy. Fluid administration should be kept to
                                a minimum to prevent right heart failure.
                                Thoracic vena cava: Intrathoracic IVC injury may cause hemopericardium and tamponade. Repair often is per-
                                formed through the R atrium. SVC repair often is performed via a lateral venorrhaphy.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Thoracic great vessel injury

===== PAGE 741 =====
Chest Trauma: Pneumonectomy, Lobectomy, Repair of Tracheobronchial Injury                    741

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine

                     Incision               Anterolateral thoracotomy is preferred as it provides access to the descending aorta for cross-
                                            clamping, good access to heart, and may be extended across sternum into right chest.

                     Special                Intraop blood recovery device; rapid-infusion device; graft materials for any vessels larger than 5
                       instrumentation      mm. CPB may be necessary.

                     Unique                 Use of vasodilators (SNP) prevents cardiac strain during cross-clamping of the aorta. Large
                       considerations       amount of fluid is required to prevent hypotension after clamp removal.

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time          1–3 h

                     EBL                    ≥ 1 –2 L

                     Postop care            ICU. Careful hemodynamic monitoring is critical because underlying pulmonary contusion may
                                            be worsened by inappropriate fluid administration. PA catheter may be necessary to optimize
                                            hemodynamic parameters, particularly in older patients. Coagulation studies must be carefully
                                            monitored and corrected with appropriate blood products.

                     Mortality              In general, mortality is associated with multisystem trauma and usually 2° concomitant head
                                            injury, infection, respiratory insufficiency, and renal failure.
                                            Pulmonary artery or vein, suprahepatic IVC, or SVC injury: > 70%
                                            Ascending thoracic aorta, aortic arch (in patients with stable vital signs on arrival): 50%

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                                            Blunt injury to the descending thoracic aorta: 5–25%
                                            Subclavian artery injury: 5%

                     Morbidity              Paraplegia: ~8% (with descending aortic injuries)

                     Pain score             10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Typically young adult

                     Incidence              Thoracic great vessel injury accounts for 8–9% of all vascular injuries seen in the trauma center.

                     Etiology               Blunt trauma from MVC; penetrating trauma from stab wounds or GSWs

                     Associated             Pneumothorax; hemothorax; head injury
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Chest Trauma, p. 743.

                   CHEST TRAUMA: PNEUMONECTOMY, LOBECTOMY,
                   REPAIR OF TRACHEOBRONCHIAL INJURY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Penetrating injuries to the chest can be divided into high- and low-velocity injuries. All stab wounds
                   are classified as low-velocity injuries. GSWs may be considered low- or high-velocity injuries, depending on energy
                   of the bullet. The majority of GSWs seen in the ED are low-velocity; however, higher velocity injuries are being seen

===== PAGE 742 =====
742   c h a p t e r 7.13     Trauma Surgery

                                with increased frequency. The extent of tissue destruction in high-velocity injuries is related to blast effect, tumbling,
                                and fragmentation of the missile, as well as secondary missiles, such as bone fragments. Patients with such injuries
                                are more likely to require thoracotomy and pulmonary resection. In general, pulmonary resection is required in
                                1% of stab wounds and 2% of GSWs. The indications for early operation are continued shock, prolonged bleeding,
                                a larger air leak with inability to oxygenate or ventilate the patient, and suspected concomitant injuries to the vital
                                intrathoracic structures. In most patients with stab wounds or low-velocity GSWs, bleeding from the lung tissue
                                stops spontaneously after evacuation of the hemothorax and reexpansion of the lung. Only 5–10% of such patients
                                will require thoracotomy to control bleeding as compared to a thoracotomy rate of 70% for high-velocity injuries.
                                Pulmonary contusion is a frequent sequela of GSWs or blunt trauma to the chest. Pulmonary contusion occurs in
                                75% of patients with flail chest but also can occur following blunt trauma without rib fracture. Alveolar rupture with
                                fluid transudation and extravasation of blood are early findings.
                                The incidence of tracheobronchial injuries reported in the autopsy series from MVC is 1%. Mechanisms of injury
                                include rapid deceleration, direct blow, or sudden increase of intratracheal pressure against a closed glottis. The most
                                common injury is transverse rupture, occurring in 74%, followed by longitudinal rupture in 18%, and complex in the
                                remaining 8%. Approximately 80% of cases with tracheal rupture occur within 2.5 cm of the carina. Patients with
                                injury to the airway may present with severe dyspnea and with massive subcutaneous emphysema. About 90% of these
                                patients will have an abnormal CXR, showing pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema, or
                                pleural effusion.
                                Tracheobronchoscopy should be performed in all patients with suspected tracheobronchial injuries to establish the
                                diagnosis and plan operative treatment.
                                Parenchymal lacerations are repaired by the simplest method available to stop bleeding or air leak. If pulmonary
                                resection is required, formal segmental resection is not necessary. A stapling device should be used to preserve as
        General Surgery

                                much lung tissue as possible.
                                Anatomic pulmonary resections are indicated when bronchial injury repair is not feasible or may lead to complete
                                lobar collapse. Pneumonectomy may be required for major hilar injuries but is associated with a mortality rate of
                                75%. Primary repair of tracheobronchial injuries should be performed as soon as possible. Transverse rupture
                                may require the placement of a sterile tracheal tube into the distal trachea through the operative field. After pos-
                                terior sutures are placed, an orotracheal tube is advanced beyond the area of injury. Main stem bronchial repair
                                is performed under one-lung ventilation. High-frequency jet ventilation may be required to maintain oxygenation.
                                Occasionally, total CPB is necessary for repair of complex airway injuries. Before closing, the suture line is pressure-
                                tested and evaluated by fiberoptic bronchoscopy.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Tracheobronchial injury; penetrating/blunt chest trauma

                                 ■■ SUMMARY Of PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine, with neck extended for proximal tracheal injury, or lateral decubitus

                                 Incision                 Transverse cervical for almost all proximal tracheal injuries
                                                          Right posterolateral thoracotomy in 5th intercostal space for thoracic trachea and right bronchial
                                                          wounds.
                                                          Left posterolateral thoracotomy for L bronchial injury

                                 Special                  Fiberoptic bronchoscope, intrabronchial tube, jet ventilator/oscillator
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   In patients with lobar resection or after pneumonectomy, PEEP may result in bronchopleural
                                   considerations         fistula

                                 Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time            2–3 h

                                 EBL                      Variable

                                 Postop care              ICU (typically)

                                 Mortality                Pneumonectomy for trauma: 75%
                                                          Penetrating tracheobronchial injuries: ~15%

===== PAGE 743 =====
Chest Trauma: Pneumonectomy, Lobectomy, Repair of Tracheobronchial Injury                     743

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity              Bronchopleural fistula: 10%
                                            Empyema: 5%
                                            Hemothorax: 2–5%
                                            Pneumothorax
                                            ARDS (depends on extent of injuries)

                     Pain score             Cervical approach: 5–7
                                            Thoracic approach: 8–10

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR
                         CHEST TRAUMA SURGERY
                   Blunt and penetrating chest trauma may present as hemopericardium, hemo/pneumothorax, blunt cardiac injury,
                   airway injuries, pulmonary contusion with or without associated flail-chest syndrome, and diaphragmatic injury.
                   Hemopericardium may rapidly progress to pericardial tamponade, requiring immediate pericardiocentesis or peri-
                    cardial window, followed by surgical exploration and repair of the cardiac or vascular laceration. These patients typi-
                    cally present in shock (↓↓ BP) with distended neck veins (↑↑ venous pressure) and distant heart sounds (Beck’s triad)
                    without evidence of tension pneumothorax. Hemothorax may present as respiratory failure, shock, and absent breath
                    sounds over the affected hemithorax. Blunt cardiac trauma may present with findings ranging from isolated ECG
                    changes to cardiac rupture. The right ventricle and interventricular septum are most commonly affected. Arrhythmias
                    and ventricular dysfunction are frequently observed. Intrathoracic tracheobronchial injuries are less frequent than
                    upper airway injuries, although they are associated with a high mortality and usually require operative intervention.

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                    Pulmonary contusion often presents with hypoxia and tachypnea; hemoptysis may also be present. Large flail-chest
                    defects may require mechanical ventilation. VATS has emerged as the leading diagnostic tool for detection of dia-
                    phragmatic injury. Preoperatively, and particularly during the induction of GA, the patient’s intravascular volume must
                    be expanded and myocardial contractility, HR, and SVR maintained. Inotropes and antiarrhythmic drugs may be re-
                    quired if hemodynamic instability occurs and does not respond to iv fluid administration. CPB is usually not required.

                         PREOPERATIVE

                    Respiratory              Associated injuries, such as hemothorax and/or pneumothorax, may be present, requiring
                                             thoracostomy tube placement. Fractures of the first or second rib should prompt a detailed
                                             search for associated intrathoracic injuries. A widened mediastinum, apical pleural capping,
                                             or fracture of the first or second rib often occurs with injury to the great vessels. Multiple rib
                                             fractures are often associated with pulmonary contusions, which may not be apparent on
                                             the initial CXR, but can progressively impair oxygenation. With tamponade, spontaneous
                                             respiration is preferred over PPV (→ ↓ venous return + ↓ CO). Significant intrathoracic
                                             tracheobronchial disruption may require rigid bronchoscopy or a surgical airway.
                                             Tests: CXR (PA + lateral views). Upright inspiratory films best delineate chest structures;
                                             expiratory films enhance visualization of pneumothorax, but are difficult to obtain in
                                             multiple-trauma patients; ABG; chest CT if the patient’s condition permits.

                    Cardiovascular           BP and HR should be followed and responses to fluid resuscitation noted. With adequate
                                             resuscitation, the EJ veins should appear full. CO can be significantly reduced despite normal
                                             BP measurements. Pulsus paradoxus may be present, with decreases in SBP of 10–12 mm Hg
                                             during inspiration. Preop, intravascular volume should be restored, especially in the setting of
                                             suspected severe RV dysfunction, and myocardial contractility supported with inotropes as
                                             necessary. Correction of metabolic acidosis with iv bicarbonate may be indicated (e.g., 1 mEq/kg,
                                             then 3 ABG). Myocardial contusion also can occur and can be associated with atrial or ven-
                                             tricular arrhythmias, RBBB, and RV failure, because the right heart is substernal and most
                                             directly involved in blunt trauma to the sternum. Supportive therapy with antiarrhythmics
                                             (e.g., lidocaine 1–2 mg/min) and inotropes (dopamine or epinephrine) may be required. Elec-
                                             trolyte abnormalities should be corrected. Substantial intravascular access should be obtained,
                                             with strong consideration given to the need for invasive monitoring (arterial line, CVP, etc.).
                                             Tests: ABG, serial ECGs with myocardial contusion. eFAST-scan is the test of choice for
                                             detection of pericardial effusions. TTE or TEE may definitively diagnose cardiac tampon-
                                             ade, significant hemothorax, and major aortic injuries.

===== PAGE 744 =====
744   c h a p t e r 7.13    Trauma Surgery

                                Neurological             ↓ BP and ↓ CO may compromise cerebral perfusion. Associated head injury also can con-
                                                         tribute to alterations in mental status. Pupil size and reactivity should be noted. Glasgow
                                                         Coma Scale score ≤ 8 indicates significant brain injury.

                                Musculoskeletal          Known or suspected C-spine fractures require intubation precautions, with laryngoscopy
                                                         performed while an assistant provides in-line stabilization of the patient’s head in the neu-
                                                         tral position.
                                                         Tests: Lateral C-spine x-rays, including C-7; CT; MRI

                                    INTRAOPERATIVE
                                *Anesthetic technique: GETA with full-stomach precautions (see p. B-5). NB: In the patient with an unstable
                                C-spine, cricoid pressure (~10 lb) may cause spinal cord injury, and consideration should be given to the establish-
                                ment of a surgical airway under local anesthesia.

                                Induction                GETA is required for exploration through a median sternotomy or left thoracotomy. In the
                                                         latter case, a DLT or BB is desirable. If a difficult airway is anticipated, a single-lumen ETT
                                                         may be placed initially with a DLT placed with an airway exchange catheter. Rapid-sequence
                                                         induction with ketamine (0.5–2.0 mg/kg) and succinylcholine is attractive b        ecause higher
                                                         doses of ketamine are usually associated with ↑ HR, ↑ BP, and ↑ CO. Careful consideration
                                                         should be given to the catecholamine-depleted trauma patient, in whom the direct myo-
                                                         cardial depressant effects of ketamine may be unmasked. Etomidate (0.2–0.6 mg/kg) is a
                                                         useful alternative for patients with head injuries. Inotropic agents (ephedrine, dopamine,
        General Surgery

                                                         epinephrine) should be immediately available to treat ↓ BP. Agents that tend to decrease
                                                         SVR, such as inhalational anesthetics and narcotics, should be introduced with caution.
                                                         The potential for sudden and substantial blood loss exists, and PRBCs (cross-matched,
                                                         type-specific or O neg) should be available in the OR prior to induction.

                                Maintenance              Initially, low-dose inhalational agents and low-dose narcotics may be used, as tolerated.
                                                         ↓ BP may require dopamine infusion (1–10 mcg/kg/min). Muscle relaxation and PPV are
                                                         used. N2O should be avoided if there will be a need for one-lung ventilation or there is
                                                         associated pulmonary contusion. If the patient is hypotensive and acidotic, scopolamine
                                                         (0.2–0.4 mg iv) will ↓ risk of recall. As cardiac and vascular injuries are repaired, BP and
                                                         CO often will improve, permitting increased depth of anesthesia and decreased inotropic
                                                         support. Indicators of improved tissue perfusion should be followed, such as resolution
                                                         of lactic acidosis, central or mixed venous oxygen saturation, and improved urine output.

                                Emergence                Trauma patients often require prolonged intubation; however, hemodynamically stable
                                                         patients with limited injuries may be extubated awake. Patients who received significant
                                                         blood replacement (> 50% of blood volume), those requiring inotropic support, intoxi-
                                                         cated patients and those with head injuries should remain intubated and mechanically
                                                         ventilated postop. Consideration for continued mechanical ventilation should be given to
                                                         those patients with large pulmonary contusions and/or flail-chest segments.

                                Blood and fluid          Be prepared for large blood loss.        Large blood may occur, depending on the severity
                                   requirements          IV: 14 ga × 2                            of the injury. Crystalloid and/or blood products
                                                         Fluid warmer                             should be infused to maintain BP and CVP (full
                                                         Rapid-infusion device                    jugular veins).
                                                         Airway humidifier
                                                         T&C PRBCs

                                Monitoring               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).          ECG should be observed for changes associated with
                                                         Arterial line                            myocardial contusion (atrial/ventricular dysrhyth-
                                                         CVP                                      mias, RBBB, ST-T wave changes). CVP monitoring
                                                         ± PA catheter                            can be useful in guiding fluid management. With
                                                                                                  release of tamponade, CVP rapidly drops toward
                                                                                                  normal, and CO and BP will markedly improve.
                                                         ± TEE                                    Will provide excellent monitor of LVEDV and SVR,
                                                                                                  as well as RVSP.

===== PAGE 745 =====
Abdominal Trauma: Damage Control             745

                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points            Axillary roll, if lateral decubitus position; chest roll
                                           3 eyes                               if median sternotomy.
                                           ± C-spine: neutral position

                    Complications          Hypothermia                          Hypothermia → dysrhythmias + ↓ CO → acidosis.
                                                                                Rx: warm OR, warm iv fluids, humidify gases, and
                                                                                use patient warming devices.
                                           Awareness                            May be unavoidable in unstable patients. Rx: Con-
                                                                                sider scopolamine 0.2–0.4 mg iv.
                                           Renal failure                        Usually 2° ↓ renal perfusion (prerenal). Rx: Restore
                                                                                CO with volume and inotropes.
                                           Coagulopathy                         Most commonly 2° dilutional thrombocytopenia.
                                                                                DIC may require replacement therapy with Plts,
                                                                                FFP and cryoprecipitate. Massive transfusion may
                                                                                benefit from a 1:1 ratio of PRBC to FFP. Maintain nl
                                                                                Ca++ (1.05–1.3 mM/L).

                         POSTOPERATIVE
                    Complications          Hypotension                          Cardiogenic shock may be 2° prolonged ↓ BP or
                                           Arrhythmias                          cardiac contusion. Neurogenic shock may be seen
                                                                                with associated spinal cord injuries. Hemodynamic
                                                                                instability with atrial/ventricular dysrhythmias may

                                                                                                                                                   General Surgery
                                                                                occur. Treatment with inotropic infusions (dopa-
                                                                                mine 5–10 mcg/kg/min or epinephrine 50–200 ng/
                                                                                kg/min) and antiarrhythmics.
                                           Hypothermia                          Active warming of iv fluids and warming blanket
                                                                                should be continued in ICU or PACU if hypother-
                                                                                mia persists. If neurologic injury is present, consid-
                                                                                eration should be given to mild hypothermia.
                                           ARDS                                 Interstitial and alveolar edema → progressively
                                                                                worsening pulmonary function requiring prolonged
                                                                                mechanical ventilation. Institution of lung protec-
                                                                                tive ventilation strategies should be considered.
                                           Coagulopathy                         Based on clinical assessment and laboratory data
                                           Renal failure                        (PT, Plt count, fibrinogen); transfusion of Plts, FFP,
                                                                                and/or cryoprecipitate may be indicated.
                                           VTE                                  See p. B-8.

                    Pain                   PCA (p. C-1) or parenteral           Epidural infusions of narcotic and/or low dose
                      management           narcotics                            local anesthetics can be effective in patients with-
                                           Epidural (p. C-3)                    out coagulopathy. Continuous epidural anesthesia
                                                                                will also be beneficial in the setting of multiple rib
                                                                                fractures.

                   ABDOMINAL TRAUMA: DAMAGE CONTROL
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The incidence of abdominal injuries requiring laparotomy approaches 25% for penetrating and
                   5–8% for blunt abdominal trauma. In blunt trauma, liver and spleen injuries occur with an incidence of ~50%. In

===== PAGE 746 =====
746   c h a p t e r 7.13    Trauma Surgery

                                penetrating trauma, the most common injuries are small bowel (29%), liver (28%), colon (23%), and stomach (13%).
                                Many preventable deaths in trauma patients are related to shock from unrecognized intraabdominal hemorrhage
                                caused by solid organ injury.
                                Victims of severe multisystem trauma are particularly susceptible to development of a fatal coagulopathic state
                                2° hypothermia, acidosis, dilution, and consumption. Replacement of two or more blood volumes with NS and
                                PRBCs will decrease the level of coagulation factors to 15%. Because of delays in obtaining coagulation profile
                                results, coagulation factors should be replaced empirically in the setting of a large transfusion requirement (e.g.,
                                1 U FFP/1.5 U PRBC). Metabolic acidosis affects both the circulatory system and coagulation, → ↓ CO and trig-
                                gering DIC. Chances of salvaging a patient with pH < 7.0 approach zero. To stop this self-perpetuating downward
                                cycle, the concept of “Damage Control” has evolved. This involves rapid laparotomy to control hemorrhage and
                                GI spillage, followed by temporary closure of the abdomen and subsequent exploration after the patient has been
                                warmed and stabilized. With the use of this technique, ~40% of critically injured patients can be saved from other-
                                wise fatal injuries.
                                With the patient on a heated operating table, the patient is prepped from the thighs to the neck and draped, and
                                the abdomen is entered through a midline incision. This critical moment can be associated with significant blood
                                loss and may require rapid blood transfusion. Four-quadrant packing with laparotomy pads is performed in the
                                abdominal cavity, and manual compression of the subdiaphragmatic aorta may be instituted if packing alone does
                                 not control the hemorrhage. If necessary, the operation is stopped, and blood/fluid resuscitation is performed. After
                                 consultation with the anesthesiologist, the surgeon proceeds with the sequential unpacking of each of the four
                                 quadrants and identifying injuries. Vascular injuries are controlled with clamping and ligation or shunting, bowel
                                 injuries are stapled across, but no attempt is made to restore bowel continuity. Liver and retroperitoneal injuries
                                 are controlled with packing alone. When damage control is performed, the abdomen is closed with a running skin
        General Surgery

                                 suture, if appropriate; otherwise, a temporary vacuum dressing is used. PIP should be monitored during closure, as
                                 patients may develop abdominal compartment syndrome (↑↑ intraabdominal pressure → ↑ PIP, ↓ UO, normal
                                 filling pressures). The patient is then transported to ICU and actively warmed and resuscitated. Reoperation should
                                 be performed at 24–48 h when the patient is rewarmed and acidosis and coagulopathy have resolved. Definitive
                                 repair of the injured organs should be completed.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Intraabdominal trauma and hemorrhage

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                Midline abdominal

                                 Special                 Fluid-warming, rapid-infusion device
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Autotransfusion device (e.g., Cell Saver) may be of use if no contamination of abdominal cavity.
                                   considerations

                                 Antibiotics             Cefotetan 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time           45–90 min

                                 Closing                 Even temporary closure may not be possible because of severe bowel edema. A silo made from
                                   considerations        a plastic iv bag may be used to cover the bowel. Monitor PIP and UO during abdominal wall clo-
                                                         sure because abdominal compartment syndrome may develop.

                                 EBL                     Average transfusion requirement: 12 L crystalloids, 20 U PRBCs, 10–15 U FFP, 6 U Plts

                                 Postop care             ICU; patient remains intubated. Active rewarming is of primary importance.

                                 Mortality               70%

                                 Morbidity               Intraabdominal abscess: 30%
                                                         Fistulas: 10%

                                 Pain score              10

===== PAGE 747 =====
Abdominal Trauma: Hepatic and Splenic Injuries          747

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Typically young adult

                     Male:Female             9:1

                     Incidence               25% for penetrating and 5% for blunt abdominal trauma

                     Etiology                MVC; penetrating injury (e.g., GSW or stab wound)

                     Associated              Chest trauma; closed head trauma; pelvic fracture
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Abdominal Trauma Surgery, p. 751.

                   ABDOMINAL TRAUMA: HEPATIC AND SPLENIC INJURIES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                       General Surgery
                   Description: The liver is the most commonly injured organ in patients with penetrating trauma, while the spleen
                   is the most commonly injured organ with blunt trauma. Approximately 30% of all patients requiring laparotomy
                   for trauma will have hepatic injuries. The majority of injuries can be managed nonoperatively unless other injuries
                   mandate laparotomy. Thus, most liver injuries that require operation are complex (grades IV–V), with large blood
                   loss and high mortality (up to 30%).
                   In a patient with massive intraabdominal hemorrhage, sudden cardiovascular collapse is predictable when the
                   abdomen is opened. Laparotomy with manual compression of the aorta at the aortic hiatus is recommended. Access
                   for subsequent aortic clamping is rapidly obtained by blunt finger dissection of the lesser sac. After removing all clots
                   and free blood, four-quadrant packing is used to control bleeding. Significant liver bleeding should be controlled
                   with manual compression, the Pringle maneuver, and perihepatic packing.
                   Several maneuvers can be used to facilitate repair of liver injuries: Manual compression temporarily con-
                   trols bleeding and allows time for volume resuscitation. Portal triad occlusion (Pringle maneuver; Fig. 7.13-5)
                   decreases blood loss and identifies the patient who might benefit from selective hepatic artery ligation. Perihepat-
                   ic packing and planned reexploration is a lifesaving maneuver and should be used early for patients with severe
                   injuries, before they become hypothermic, coagulopathic, and acidotic. Extensive liver mobilization, parenchymal
                   disruption (i.e., finger fracturing), and atriocaval shunts are rarely indicated. Hepatic angiogram and emboliza-
                   tion in the immediate or early postop phase may be very useful for patients with severe injuries. At reexploration,
                   intrahepatic omental packing may be used for obliterating dead space. Closed suction drains should be used in all
                   patients.
                   Portal triad (portal vein, hepatic artery, common bile duct) injuries, although rare, are associated with extremely
                   high mortality. Isolated portal vein injuries are associated with a 70% mortality. The portal vein should be repaired
                   if possible; however, ligation can be tolerated. Careful volume resuscitation should follow portal vein ligation to
                   avoid ↓ BP 2° fluid sequestration in the splanchnic bed. Simple ligation of the hepatic artery, preferably proximal to
                   the gastroduodenal artery, is recommended for most major hepatic artery injuries. Shock and transfusion-related
                   coagulopathy occurring in the immediate postop period are responsible for 80% of the deaths in liver injury patients.
                   Control of hemorrhage remains the critical component in the successful management of liver injuries.
                   More than 90% of splenic injuries are caused by blunt trauma. Approximately 75–80% of these patients can be man-
                   aged nonoperatively. Hemodynamic instability or failure of nonoperative management necessitates splenectomy.
                   Grade IV (active intraperitoneal bleeding) or V (shattered/avulsed injuries) are associated with the highest rates of
                   splenectomy. Massive bleeding from the LUQ is probably caused by splenic injury. In trauma, the spleen is delivered
                   into the wound by blunt dissection. The spleen is removed by cross-clamping the hilum and dividing the short gastric

===== PAGE 748 =====
748   c h a p t e r 7.13     Trauma Surgery

                                                                                                                               Common
                                                                                                                               hepatic artery

                                                                                                                               Portal vein

                                                                                                                               Common
                                                                                                                               bile duct
        General Surgery

                                                                                                                               Duodenum

                                            Figure 7.13-5. Pringle maneuver compression of the portal triad structures with a
                                            noncrushing vascular clamp for hepatic inflow control. (Reproduced with permission
                                            from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds: Surgery: Scientific Principles
                                            and Practice, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2001.)

                                vessels. The LUQ is packed and reinspected for hemostasis once better resuscitation is provided. The splenic salvage
                                rate in the pediatric population approaches 90%.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Hepatic injury; splenic injury

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                Supine

                                 Incision                Midline abdominal

                                 Special                 Active rewarming device; cell salvage
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                  Most emergency laparotomies require close cooperation between anesthesiologist and surgeon.
                                   considerations        The procedure may need to be interrupted for fluid or blood resuscitation if patient becomes
                                                         hypotensive. The entire chest and abdomen, including both groins, need to be accessible to the
                                                         surgeon; ECG electrodes are placed preferably on the patient’s back.

                                 Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

                                 Surgical time           1–2 h

===== PAGE 749 =====
Abdominal Trauma: Vascular Injuries     749

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Closing                After massive fluid resuscitation, concern over compartment syndrome may preclude primary
                       considerations       fascial closure. The abdomen may be left open for later closure.

                     EBL                    2–10 L (transfusion requirement 6–20 U)

                     Postop care            ICU: shock and coagulopathy management; monitoring for possible rebleeding and abdominal
                                            compartment syndrome.

                     Mortality              Liver: 10%
                                            Spleen: 10% (usually due to associated injuries)

                     Morbidity              Liver: perihepatic abscess: 10%
                                            Spleen: septic complications: 7%

                     Pain score             8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Any age

                     Male:Female            3:1

                     Incidence              Liver: 30% of patients requiring laparotomy for trauma
                                            Spleen: 10% of patients requiring laparotomy for trauma

                                                                                                                                                      General Surgery
                     Etiology               Liver: penetrating wound (80%) with gunshot wounds responsible for 60% and stab wounds for
                                            40%
                                            Spleen: blunt trauma (90%), mostly due to MVC

                     Associated             Liver: isolated hepatic injury (30%); injury to one or two other organs (50%), with diaphragm,
                       conditions           major vascular structures, stomach, lung, and colon being most common.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Conditions for Abdominal Trauma Surgery, p. 751.

                   ABDOMINAL TRAUMA: VASCULAR INJURIES
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Penetrating trauma is the most common cause of abdominal vascular injuries: IVC/hepatic veins, 36%;
                   celiac/mesenteric vessels, 30%; iliac vessels, 11%; and aorta, portal/splenic, and renal vessels, each 5%. Patients with
                   gunshot wounds to the abdomen have ~25% incidence of major vascular injury; however, only ~10% of patients with
                   penetrating stab wounds will have vascular injuries. Patients sustaining blunt abdominal trauma who require lapa-
                   rotomy have a 5–10% incidence of vascular injury.
                   Initial resuscitation of the patient with abdominal vascular injuries depends on the patient’s condition. Multiple
                   large-bore catheters should be inserted in the upper extremities, or if necessary, central venous access should be
                   obtained. Because of the probable intraabdominal venous injury, lower-extremity venous access is not indicated.
                   Blood replacement during resuscitation is done preferably with type-specific blood. It is a good practice to have
                   2 U of O neg blood available immediately in the ED in case there is no time for a limited cross-match. Efforts to limit
                   hypothermia should start as soon as the patient arrives (use of warmed fluids and high-flow blood warmers and
                   covering the patient with warm blankets or a forced-air warming blanket).

===== PAGE 750 =====
750   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                Injuries to the abdominal vessels can be grouped into four regions, which require different surgical approaches:
                                Midline supramesocolic hemorrhage or hematoma (superior to the transverse mesocolon) is usually 2° injury to
                                the suprarenal aorta, celiac axis, proximal superior mesenteric artery, or proximal renal artery. Proximal aortic con-
                                trol should be obtained at the hiatus by either aortic compression or manually by entering the lesser sac and digitally
                                splitting the muscle fibers of the crura. Once this is done, direct access to the vessels is achieved through medial
                                visceral rotation of all left-sided viscera. Injuries to the aorta are then repaired directly or with the appropriate graft.
                                An injured celiac axis probably can be ligated safely if the remaining visceral vessels are intact. Superior mesenteric
                                artery injuries must be repaired, usually with a jump graft. Repair of the superior mesenteric vein is preferred, but the
                                vein may be ligated if complex injuries are present. These patients require substantial fluid resuscitation postop and
                                are at high risk for abdominal compartment syndrome. Injuries to the IVC or right side of the aorta can be exposed
                                by duodenal mobilization (Kocher maneuver).
                                Midline inframesocolic hemorrhage or hematoma results from infrarenal aorta or IVC injury. Exposure is obtained
                                by incising posterior peritoneum in the midline after displacement of the small bowel and cephalic retraction of the
                                transverse mesocolon. A proximal aortic clamp is then placed just below the left renal vein, with a distal clamp near
                                the aortic bifurcation. The defect is repaired primarily, using patch aortoplasty, end-to-end anastomosis, or a graft. If
                                the aorta is intact and an inframesocolic hematoma seems to be more extensive on the right side, or if there is active
                                bleeding coming through the base of the mesentery, then injury to the IVC should be suspected. Access to the infra-
                                hepatic IVC is preferably obtained by mobilization of the right colon and duodenum. Proximal and distal controls are
                                best obtained by either digital compression or two sponge sticks. The injury is then repaired directly. Blind clamping
                                should be avoided, but occasionally, with good exposure, a Satinsky clamp can be placed. In young patients with
                                exsanguinating hemorrhage, the infrarenal IVC can be ligated, providing time for appropriate fluid management.
                                These patients require significant fluid postop, and leg fasciotomies should be performed.
        General Surgery

                                Lateral perirenal hematoma or hemorrhage suggests injury to the renal vessels or kidney. In patients with blunt
                                abdominal trauma who have a negative abdominal CT, IVP, or arteriogram, surgery is not required. A penetrating
                                injury usually requires surgical exploration. Vascular control of the ipsilateral renal artery is obtained before the
                                hematoma is entered. If there is active bleeding from the kidney or overlying retroperitoneum, then the kidney is
                                exposed via a lateral incision, and a vascular clamp is applied to the renal vessel. This usually is followed by nephrectomy
                                (after palpation and a one-shot IVP to verify function of a normal contralateral kidney). If the contralateral kidney is
                                missing or nonfunctional, then back-table salvage surgery and autotransplantation of the injured kidney should
                                be attempted. Only 30–40% of kidneys with arterial injuries can be salvaged.
                                Lateral pelvic hematoma or hemorrhage indicates injury to the iliac vessels. Pelvic hematoma 2° blunt trauma and
                                pelvic fracture should not be explored. Primary control of bleeding is by angiography/embolization and possibly
                                external fixation of the pelvis. This need should be recognized and arranged early in the resuscitative period. For
                                penetrating injuries, vascular control is obtained at the aortic bifurcation proximally and close to the inguinal liga-
                                ment distally. The internal iliac artery is best visualized by elevating common and external iliac arteries on vascular
                                tapes. Unilateral internal iliac artery injuries can be ligated. Common or external iliac artery injuries can be repaired
                                or a graft can be inserted. Grafts may be used even in the presence of GI contamination, provided the abdomen is
                                thoroughly irrigated and the retroperitoneum is closed over the graft. A temporary intravascular shunt should be
                                used in patients requiring damage control surgery. Injuries to the iliac veins are treated with lateral venorrhaphy or
                                ligation.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Abdominal vascular injury

                                 ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                 Position                 Supine, with left arm abducted 90°

                                 Incision                 Midline abdominal

                                 Special                  Autotransfusion device (e.g., Cell Saver); thoracotomy tray; aortic compressor
                                   instrumentation

                                 Unique                   Prevent heat loss and warm all infusions and irrigation solutions. Ventilator warming should be
                                   considerations         used for cold patients. For the patient requiring massive transfusion, ratio of 1 U FFP:1.5 U
                                                          PRBCs useful. After prolonged aortic cross-clamp, prophylactic administration of NaHCO2 (1–2
                                                          mEq/kg) may be indicated to prevent “washout” acidosis.

                                 Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1–2 g iv

===== PAGE 751 =====
Abdominal Trauma: Vascular Injuries        751

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Surgical time          Variable

                     Closing                Once vascular injuries are repaired, hepatic injuries are controlled with packing, bowel injuries
                       considerations       are closed with staplers, and the abdominal wall is closed temporarily.

                     EBL                    5–10 L

                     Postop care            ICU; Patients after infrarenal vena cava ligation require volume expansion and prevention of lower
                                            extremity venous pooling. Elastic wraps and lower-extremity elevation should be maintained for
                                            at least 1 wk. Similarly, after superior mesenteric vein ligation, splanchnic hypervolemia requires
                                            vigorous fluid resuscitation and lasts ~3 d.

                     Mortality              Combined injury to the suprarenal aorta and IVC: 100%
                                            Aorta: 60%
                                            Infrarenal abdominal aorta: 50%
                                            Superior mesenteric artery: 40–80%
                                            Iliac artery: 40%
                                            Iliac vein: 30%
                                            Infrarenal vena cava: 30%
                                            Superior mesenteric vein: 20%
                                            Renal artery: 15%

                     Morbidity              Abdominal compartment syndrome (↑↑ abdominal pressure → ↑ PIP + ↓ UO)
                                            Acute renal failure
                                            Intraabdominal infection

                                                                                                                                                          General Surgery
                                            Fistula

                     Pain score             8–10

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Typically young adult

                     Male:Female            Male > female

                     Incidence              15% of patients with abdominal trauma

                     Etiology               10% of penetrating stab wounds and 25% of gunshot wounds to the abdomen will cause a major
                                            vascular injury.

                     Associated             Multiple vascular injuries; hollow viscus perforation; fecal contamination
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ABDOMINAL
                        TRAUMA SURGERY
                   Abdominal injuries range from relatively simple penetrating injuries (e.g., a stab wound) to severe blunt trauma (e.g.,
                   liver lacerations and pelvic fractures) and are often associated with massive hemorrhage. Head injuries and spinal
                   fractures may complicate management plans. The ability to provide rapid, aggressive volume replacement is often the
                   key to survival. Coagulopathy (DIC) and hypothermia present additional challenges.

                         PREOPERATIVE

                    Respiratory              Associated injuries, such as hemothorax and/or pneumothorax, may be present, requiring
                                             thoracostomy tube placement. A widened mediastinum, apical pleural capping, or fracture
                                             of the 1st or 2nd rib often occurs with serious vascular injuries. Multiple rib fractures sug-
                                             gest possible pulmonary contusions, which may not be evident on initial CXR, but can
                                             progressively impair oxygenation and ventilation.
                                             Tests: CXR (PA + lateral views); ABG

===== PAGE 752 =====
752   c h a p t e r 7.13   Trauma Surgery

                                Cardiovascular         BP and HR should be followed and responses to fluid resuscitation noted. Tachycardia
                                                       can maintain an adequate BP with reduced pulse pressure, despite 25–30% loss of
                                                       blood volume. Attempt to quantify overt blood loss (e.g., scalp lacerations, open frac-
                                                       ture sites). Blunt chest trauma (e.g., steering wheel contact) may result in myocar-
                                                       dial contusion with various dysrhythmias, most often premature ventricular or atrial
                                                       complexes.
                                                       Tests: Serial Hct; ECG in patients > 50 yr of age or with blunt chest trauma.

                                Neurological           Seek physical evidence of open or closed head injuries, such as palpable depressions of
                                                       the skull or scalp lacerations, abrasions, or contusions. Pupil size and reactivity should
                                                       be noted. Intubation in the ER is necessary for patients who are unable to protect their
                                                       airway, require hyperventilation, or are combative and unable to cooperate with medical
                                                       staff for exam and treatment. In general, any patient with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
                                                       ≤ 8 (no spontaneous eye opening, inappropriate or incomprehensible speech, and only
                                                       reflexive motor responses) requires intubation. Motor and/or sensory deficits may reflect
                                                       spinal cord injury and may be associated with neurogenic (“spinal”) shock, particularly
                                                       with upper thoracic or cervical cord injuries.
                                                       Tests: C-spine x-rays (lateral view, including C7) is a good screening exam: 3 for altered
                                                       vertical alignment and unequal disk interspaces. CT scan or MRI of head: 3 for gross
                                                       asymmetry, hemorrhage, or midline shift.

                                Musculoskeletal        Known or suspected C-spine injuries require intubation precautions. In urgent cases, intu-
                                                       bation without neck extension is achieved with an assistant providing in-line stabilization
                                                       of the head in the neutral position. Basilar skull fractures contraindicate nasal ET or NG
        General Surgery

                                                       tubes. Pelvic and femur fractures may represent sources of significant (> 1000 mL) occult
                                                       blood loss.
                                                       Tests: Radiographs of C-spine (see above), skull, extremities

                                Hematologic            Depending on estimations of prior, ongoing, and anticipated surgical blood losses, preop
                                                       T&C appropriate. O neg or type-specific blood should be available until crossmatched
                                                       product available.
                                                        Tests: Serial Hct; T&C; 3 Ca++ and K+ following massive transfusions.

                                Laboratory             Other tests as indicated from H&P or suspected injuries, including electrolytes, liver panel,
                                                       toxicology screen, blood alcohol level.

                                Premedication          Premedication is rarely useful due to the urgency of the procedures and the need to have an
                                                       alert, responsive patient for serial evaluations of mental status or abdominal pain. Sedative
                                                       premedication should be avoided in patients who are hemodynamically unstable and those
                                                       with probable head injuries. Virtually all patients are considered to have full stomachs, and
                                                       any compromise of the ability to protect the airway is inappropriate.

                                    INTRAOPERATIVE
                                Anesthetic technique: GETA with full-stomach precautions (p. B-5)

                                Induction              Before induction, a variety of laryngoscope blades, ETT tube sizes, and ideally intubating
                                                       adjuncts including video laryngoscope and FOB in preparation for potiential difficult air-
                                                       way should be ready. LMA may be useful for providing temporary airway control without
                                                       C-spine manipulation if direct laryngoscopy is difficult. LMA may be used as a conduit for
                                                       ET intubation (fiberoptic or fast-track LMA). Equipment for emergent cricothyrotomy (a
                                                       14-ga iv catheter + adapter) and jet ventilation should be in OR.
                                                       Most often, preoxygenation is followed by a rapid-sequence iv induction with cricoid
                                                       pressure (Sellick’s maneuver) using Propofol (1–2.5 mg/kg) and succinylcholine (1.0–1.5
                                                       mg/kg). If hypotension is present or a concern, alternate induction agents (e.g., ketamine
                                                       0.5–2.0 mg/kg iv or etomidate 0.1–0.3 mg/kg iv) may be used. Verify any meds already
                                                       administered in ED and field. Axial head and neck stabilization is necessary if C-spine
                                                       injury is present or suspected.

===== PAGE 753 =====
Abdominal Trauma: Vascular Injuries         753

                    Induction          Some trauma patients are intubated in the ED. Verify ETT placement by auscultation and
                       (cont’d)        ETCO2 monitoring. Very low ETCO2 values may be obtained in patients with markedly
                                       reduced CO. Ventilation with 100% O2 and paralysis with muscle relaxant is appropriate.
                                       Ongoing fluid resuscitation should be continued during this time. Consider sending lab
                                       studies/ABG at this point and ensuring availability of blood products.

                    Maintenance        Titrate O2/air, muscle relaxants, narcotics, and volatile agents. Avoid N2O in the presence
                                       of pneumothorax, pneumocephalus, bowel distention, or prolonged procedures. Shorter-
                                       acting agents (e.g., volatile agents, remifentanil, rocuronium), carefully titrated, may be
                                       preferred in patients with head injuries to facilitate early postop assessment of neurologic
                                       status. If ↓ BP precludes use of volatile anesthetics and opiates, consider low-dose scopol-
                                       amine (0.1–0.3 mg iv) or ketamine (0.25 mg/kg/15–30 min) for amnesia. Use forced-air
                                       warming blanket(s) and warmed IV fluids, and consider elevated OR temperatures and
                                       warmed irrigation fluids (surgical field, bladder) to maintain normothermia.

                    Emergence          Prior to extubation, patient should be awake and able to protect his/her airway and
                                       should be hemodynamically stable and spontaneously ventilating with ease through the
                                       ETT. Consider postop mechanical ventilation and ICU care for trauma patients with the
                                       following conditions: elderly with rib fractures, significant pulmonary compromise/trauma,
                                       ongoing acidosis, hemodynamic instability, ongoing or anticipated significant fluid and
                                       blood product resuscitation, coagulopathies, intoxication, or neurological impairment.

                    Blood and fluid    Anticipate large blood loss            Large blood losses may have already occurred and
                       requirements    IV: 14–16 ga × 2 or 7–9 Fr × 2         continue to occur, depending on the mechanism of

                                                                                                                                                General Surgery
                                       NS/LR variable depending on            injury (e.g., liver lacerations, major vascular injury,
                                         blood loss                           pelvic fractures). Determine prior fluid administration
                                       Fluid warmers                          in field and ED. Early determination of availability of
                                       Rapid-infusion device                  blood products advised. Crystalloid, colloid, and blood
                                       T&C PRBCs, ± other blood               products should be given to reestablish euvolemia-
                                         products                             based injuries, EBL, and clinical assessment, which
                                                                              may include BP, HR, CVP/PCWP, UO, Hct, ABG,
                                                                              TEE, etc. With massive transfusion, Plts and FFP will
                                                                              be needed. Consider a transfusion ratio of 4 U plas-
                                                                              ma/6 U PRBC/1 U (pooled) during massive and ongo-
                                                                              ing hemorrhage. Vigilant assessment of bleeding, EBL,
                                                                              and hemodynamic status essential during ongoing
                                                                              massive bleeding. Frequent assessment of Hct/Hgb,
                                                                              Plts, coags, Ca++, and ABG also essential in manag-
                                                                              ing significant ongoing hemorrhage and resuscitation.
                                                                              Postop hypothermia is best minimized by warming all
                                                                              iv and irrigating fluids, maintaining OR temperature @
                                                                              78–80°F, humidifying inspired gases, and use of forced
                                                                              air and circulating water warming blankets.

                    Monitoring         Standard monitors (see B-1).           Monitor patient during transport to OR and apply
                                       Urinary catheter                       standard monitoring as soon as patient enters the OR.
                                       ± Arterial line                        Arterial line useful in unstable patient or when fre-
                                                                              quent lab sampling anticipated.
                                       ± CVP line                             CVP line or PA catheter may be useful if vasoac-
                                       ± PA catheter                          tive infusions needed or if ventricular dysfunction
                                       ± TEE                                  apparent. Placement of additional monitoring
                                                                              should be accomplished without delaying the surgi-
                                                                              cal control of hemorrhage or without interrupting
                                                                              aggressive volume resuscitation.

                    Positioning        3 and pad pressure points              If C-spine has not been cleared by both radiograph-
                                       3 eyes                                 ically and clinically, neck should remain immobi-
                                                                              lized intraop and postop.

===== PAGE 754 =====
754   c h a p t e r 7.13     Trauma Surgery

                                 Complications            Hypothermia                             Preexisting hypothermia common in trauma patient.
                                                                                                  Measures to manage hypothermia early are key and
                                                                                                  include warm OR, use of forced air warming, and
                                                                                                  warm iv fluids.
                                                          Awareness                               May be unavoidable in unstable or hypotensive
                                                                                                  patients. Rx: Consider scopolamine 0.2–0.4 mg iv
                                                                                                  or midazolam 1–2 mg iv in such situations.
                                                          Coagulopathy                            Causes include dilutional, hypothermia and brain
                                                                                                  injury. Assess status and treat early.
                                                          Aspiration                              Assume full stomach; aspiration may have occurred
                                                                                                  prior to OR
                                                          Airway trauma                           Sources include trauma or subsequent AW
                                                                                                  management

                                     POSTOPERATIVE

                                Complications             Hypothermia                             Active warming of fluids and blood products and
                                                                                                  forced-air warming blankets and warm room
                                                                                                  temperatures should be continued in PACU/ICU if
                                                                                                  hypothermia persists.
                                                          Atelectasis, V/Q mismatch               Pulmonary compliance may decrease with large
                                                                                                  volumes of fluid replacement. Pulmonary contu-
        General Surgery

                                                                                                  sions may aggravate this problem and severely
                                                                                                  compromise oxygenation and ventilation, requiring
                                                                                                  high-inspired O2 concentration, high PIP, and PEEP.
                                                          Coagulopathy                            Causes include dilutional, hypothermic, brain
                                                                                                  injury, and development of SIRS/sepsis.
                                                          VTE                                     See p. B-8.

                                Pain                      PCA or parenteral narcotics             Patients with rib fractures benefit from epidural
                                  management              epidural narcotic (see p. C-3, C-4)     narcotic and/or low-dose local anesthetic infusions.

                                Tests                     Hb/Hct                                  PT/PTT, Plt counts, if unexplained bleeding postop
                                                          CXR                                     Fibrinogen, fibrin split products, if DIC suspected

                                Suggested Readings
                                See p. 737 and end of this chapter.

                                PEDIATRIC TRAUMA
                                    airway and vascular access
                                Description: Children younger than 15 yr are victims in about 25% of all trauma occurring in the United States. This
                                incidence translates to ~200,000 hospitalizations and 10,000 deaths annually. Another 10,000–12,000 children sus-
                                tain permanent impairment as a result of their injuries. According to the National Pediatric Trauma Registry, 40% of
                                all pediatric injuries occur as a result of MVC, and 35% are injuries sustained at home. Falls remain the most common
                                cause of severe injury in infants and toddlers, whereas bicycle accidents cause most of the injuries in older pediatric
                                groups. The majority of pediatric injuries that occur are 2° blunt trauma, and infants < 2 yr of age are known to have
                                higher mortality rates for the same level of injury compared to older children.
                                The same sequence of primary survey, resuscitation, secondary survey, and definitive care should be followed as
                                in adults. Confirmation of a patent airway is the essential first step. The best method for restoring airway patency

===== PAGE 755 =====
Pediatric Trauma      755

                   is the jaw-thrust maneuver and removal of any debris from the mouth. In infants, the head is relatively large
                   compared to the body, causing the neck to be in flexation when the patient is positioned on a flat surface. Padding
                   the torso and allowing the occiput to rest on the supporting surface allows for more favorable airway alignment.
                   The most common reason for intubation in the pediatric trauma patient is loss of consciousness or as part of
                   resuscitation from shock. Only 2% of children sustaining trauma will present with complete mechanical obstruction
                   to the airway. In the rare child who presents with acute airway obstruction, needle cricothyrotomy is the
                   preferred method of securing the airway until definitive airway control can be achieved. This technique of ventilation
                   uses the principle of jet insufflation as defined in the adult. Surgical cricothyrotomy in children results in a high
                   incidence of subglottic stenosis, but it is still a viable option in children > 10 if needle cricothyrotomy fails to be
                   effective.
                   Because infants are obligatory nasal and diaphragmatic breathers, fractures and soft-tissue injuries that occlude the
                   nostrils may actually obstruct the airway. Because air swallowed by the infant or insufflated into the stomach may
                   cause acute gastric distention and restrict diaphragmatic excursion, the stomach should be decompressed with an
                   OG tube.
                   Once the airway is secured and breathing is ensured, attention should be given to the circulation. In the noncrying
                   child, the SBP should be ~80 + their age in years × 2. Children may compensate for as much as 25% of circulating
                   volume blood loss without a change in BP. Poor peripheral perfusion, decreased level of consciousness and ↓ UO are
                   suggestive of hypovolemia. IV access must be obtained rapidly to begin crystalloid resuscitation in any child with
                   impending signs of shock. If the peripheral iv access is difficult to obtain, as is often the case, saphenous vein cutdown
                   at the saphenofemoral junction should be performed. In infants, if iv access cannot be obtained within 2 min, intraos-
                   seous access should be attempted (see below and Fig. 7.13-6). After iv access has been obtained, as many as three
                   boluses of crystalloid, using a volume of 20 mL/kg, can be given. If the hypovolemic shock state has not been reversed

                                                                                                                                                        General Surgery
                   after the 2nd bolus, and other causes of shock—such as spinal injury, cardiac tamponade, or pneumothorax—are
                   excluded, blood (10 mL/kg) should be administered without delay.
                   Another important problem in the management of pediatric trauma is related to a high ratio of body surface area
                   to body mass and a lack of substantial subcutaneous tissue. A small infant who is hypothermic may be refractory to
                   therapy; therefore, every attempt should be made to prevent heat loss, and all iv fluids should be warmed.
                   Needle cricothyrotomy: With the head in neutral position (which may require placement of towels under the shoul-
                   ders), the neck should be prepped from the jaw to the chest. The neck is protected by in-line immobilization. The
                   cricothyroid membrane should be identified, and the thyroid cartilage immobilized with the surgeon’s left hand. The

                                           Tibial
                                           tuberosity

                                           Anterior
                                           border

                                                                       90° to
                                                                      medial
                                                                      surface

                               Figure 7.13-6. Intraosseous infusion. (Reproduced with permission from Textbook of
                               Pediatric Life Support. American Heart Association, 1994.)

===== PAGE 756 =====
756   c h a p t e r 7.13      Trauma Surgery

                                cricothyroid membrane is punctured perpendicularly with a 14–16-ga iv catheter over a needle. The needle is then
                                redirected caudally, the catheter slid off into the trachea, and jet insufflation initiated. Placement of a permanent
                                airway should follow.
                                Intraosseous infusion: After skin preparation, an incision is made 2 cm distal to the tibial tuberosity on the flattened
                                medial aspect of the tibia. An 18–20-ga spinal needle (with obturator) can be used in children < 18 months of age.
                                Older patients may require use of a 13–16 bone marrow biopsy needle. Pressure and rotational motion are applied in
                                a direction perpendicular to the bone until a decrease in resistance is felt. Position of the needle can be confirmed by
                                bone marrow or blood aspiration. This route can be used for rapid fluid infusion, and most resuscitation medications
                                can be given this way. Interosseus infusion, however, is only an emergency maneuver and should be used to restore
                                circulating volume to the level that enables more permanent iv access.
                                Saphenous cutdown: The groin should be prepped and draped and a curvilinear incision made 1–2 cm below and
                                parallel to the inguinal ligament. The saphenous vein is identified at the saphenofemoral junction medial to the femo-
                                ral artery. Two ligatures are passed underneath; the distal ligature is tied and used to apply tension to the vein. The
                                vein is punctured with a scalpel blade (No. 11) and cut, creating a small flap. Tension applied to the proximal ligature
                                reduces backbleeding during cannulation. A catheter is then introduced, the proximal ligature is tied, and the distal
                                ligature is used to secure the catheter in place.
                                Usual preop diagnosis: Airway obstruction; hypovolemic shock; hypovolemic shock with difficult iv access

                                Suggested Readings
                                  1. Capan LM, Miller SM: Trauma and burns. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical Anesthesia, 5th edition.
                                     Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2006, 1262–97.
                                  2. Davis JW, Davis IC, Bennink LD, et al: Are automated blood pressure measurements accurate in trauma patients? J Trauma
        General Surgery

                                     2003; 55:860.
                                  3. Ferraris VA, Bernard AC, Hyde B: The impact of antiplatelet drugs on trauma outcomes. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012;
                                     73:492.
                                  4. Ley EJ, Clond MA, Srour MK, et al: Emergency department crystalloid resuscitation of 1.5L or more is associated with
                                     increased mortality in elderly and nonelderly trauma patients. J Trauma 2011; 70:398.
                                  5. Mackersie RC: Pitfalls in the evaluation and resuscitation of the trauma patient. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2010: 28.
                                  6. Pfeifer R, Pape HC: Missed injuries in trauma patients: a literature review. Patient Saf Surg 2008; 2:20.
                                  7. Raja AS, Sullivan AF, Pallin DJ, et al: Adoption of video laryngoscopy in Massachusetts Emergency departments. J Emerg Med
                                     2012; 42:233.
                                  8. Seamon MJ, Feather C, Smith BP, et al: Just one drop: the significance of a single hypotensive blood pressure reading during
                                     trauma resuscitations. J Trauma 2010; 68:1289.
                                  9. Tobin JM, Varon AJ: Review article: update in trauma anesthesiology: perioperative resuscitation management. Anesth Analg
                                     2012; 115(6):1326–1333.
                                 10. Wilson WC, Christopher MD, Hoyt DB, eds: Trauma: Emergency Resuscitation, Perioperative Anesthesia, Surgical Management.
                                     Informa Healthcare, New York: 2007.

