# 8_OBGYN
# Source: 8 OBGYN.pdf (Jaffe's Anesthesiologist's Manual of Surgical Procedures, 5th ed., Wolters Kluwer, 2014)
# Section: 8.0 Obstetric/Gynecologic Surgery
# Pages: 760-875
# Note: Text-extract for project knowledge. Figures live in the source PDF only.

===== PROCEDURE INDEX =====
- Staging Laparotomy For Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, And Primary Peritoneal Cancer (p. 760)
- Interval, Secondary Cytoreductive, And Second Look Assessment Laparotomy (p. 764)
- Radical Vulvectomy (p. 768)
- Conization Of The Cervix (p. 773)
- Suction Curettage For Gestational Trophoblastic Disease (p. 777)
- Pelvic Exenteration (p. 781)
- Radical Hysterectomy (p. 790)
- Interstitial Perineal Implants (p. 796)
- Dilatation And Curettage (D&C) (p. 802)
- Therapeutic Abortion, Dilatation, And Evacuation (D&E) (p. 803)
- Hysteroscopy (p. 807)
- Obstetric/Gynecologic (p. 811)
- Transvaginal Oocyte Retrieval (Tvor) (p. 813)
- Laparoscopic Or Robotic (p. 820)
- Operations For Pelvic Organ Prolapse: Anterior And Posterior Colporrhaphy, Enterocele Repair, Sacrospinous Ligament Vaginal Vault Suspension, Uterosacral Ligament Vaginal Vault Suspension, Sacrocolpopexy (p. 824)
- Operations For Stress Urinary Incontinence (p. 828)
- Cesarean Section—Lower Segment And Classic (p. 834)
- Medical And Surgical Management Of Postpartum Hemorrhage (p. 841)
- Repair Of Uterine Rupture (p. 844)
- Postpartum Tubal Ligation (p. 845)
- Repair Of Vaginal/Cervical Lacerations (p. 848)
- Cervical Cerclage—Elective And Emergent (p. 851)
- Removal Of Retained Placenta (p. 854)
- Management Of Uterine Inversion (p. 858)
- Laparoscopic Surgery For Endometriosis (p. 862)
- Laparoscopic Surgery For Ectopic Pregnancy Or Adnexal Mass (p. 865)
- Laparoscopic Myomectomy (p. 867)
- Laparoscopic Hysterectomy (p. 869)
- Laparoscopic Surgery For Vaginal Vault Suspension (p. 872)

===== PAGE ? =====
s e c t i o n

                     8.0 OBSTETRIC/
                                      GYNECOLOGIC
                                      SURGERY

===== PAGE ? =====
c h a p t e r

                                      8.1 Gynecologic
                                           Oncology

                                           surgeons
                                           Gina Westhoff, MD
                                           Nelson N. Teng, MD, PhD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD

===== PAGE 760 =====
STAGING LAPAROTOMY FOR OVARIAN, FALLOPIAN
                                   TUBE, AND PRIMARY PERITONEAL CANCER
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Ovarian carcinoma has the highest mortality rate of all gynecologic malignancies because it is usually
                                   discovered in advanced stages with a pelvic mass, omental caking, and ascites. Surgery is used for staging as well
                                   as therapy. Studies have demonstrated an inverse relationship between postop residual tumor mass and survival;
                                   therefore, the goals of surgery are accurate staging and optimal tumor debulking (< 1 cm residual disease). The
                                   standard procedure consists of a meticulous exploration of the abdominopelvic cavity, abdominopelvic cytology,
                                   multiple random and targeted biopsies, total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
                                   (BSO), pelvic and paraaortic lymph node dissection, infracolic omentectomy, appendectomy, and additional
                                   cytoreductive procedures. After access to the abdomen is obtained through a midline abdominal incision, cytologic
                                   washings of the pelvis, pericolic gutters, lesser sac, and hemidiaphragms are done. The peritoneal cavity is carefully
                                   explored. A TAH/BSO is performed by ligating and transecting the round, infundibulopelvic, broad, cardinal, and
                                   uterosacral ligaments on both sides. The specimen is cut away from the vagina and the cuff closed. Pelvic and para-
                                   aortic lymph node dissections are then performed. Pelvic lymphadenectomy is performed by opening the pelvic peri-
                                   toneum, developing the paravesicle and pararectal space, identifying the ureter and removing the lymph node tissue
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                             Figure 8.1-1. Aortic node dissection in staging laparotomy for ovarian cancer. In this
                                             case, both right and left node dissections have occurred, leaving the kidney, renal hilum,
                                             and psoas muscle exposed. Because the dissection is infrarenal and anterior to the lumbar
                                             vessels, there is residual fatty and nodal tissue at the posterior limit of the dissection.
                             760

===== PAGE 761 =====
Staging Laparotomy for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer                 761

                   adjacent to the common and external iliac vessels and obturator vein and nerve. Paraaortic lymph node dissection
                   is performed by opening the peritoneum over the great vessels followed by removal of the lymph node bundles from
                   the preaortic, lateral aortic, and retroaortic spaces. All residual tumor is removed, using sharp dissection and/or
                   Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) and/or argon beam coagulator (ABC), and then an appendectomy
                   is usually performed. The omentum is clamped, transected, and ligated along its attachment to the transverse colon.
                   A bowel resection with possible colostomy formation may be necessary to achieve optimal cytoreductive surgery
                   (see Pelvic Exenteration, p. 781). Next, the peritoneal cavity is irrigated copiously. Targeted and random biopsies of
                   bladder, cul-de-sac of Douglas, pericolic gutters, hemidiaphragms, small bowel, large bowel, and anterior abdominal
                   wall are performed. A peritoneal port may be placed subcutaneously for use in future intraperitoneal chemotherapy.
                   Approximately 25% of patients undergoing cytoreductive surgery for advanced stages of ovarian carcinoma require
                   bowel resection with either primary reanastomosis or colostomy. A splenectomy is not routinely done unless the
                   spleen is involved with tumor. Some patients with unresectable disease and bowel obstruction will require a gas-
                   trostomy tube placement at this time. A less extensive surgical procedure may be appropriate if a large volume of
                   unresectable tumor is discovered. Surgery in these cases must be individualized. In addition, laparoscopic surgical
                   staging has recently become more common for early stage lesions.
                   In some Stage I lesions, a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (USO) is sufficient therapy. The decision to use this
                   approach depends on cell type, age, reproductive status, and extent of disease. Limited USO staging is usually per-
                   formed as a fertility sparing procedure for young women with early stage tumors. Generally, biopsies, a retroperito-
                   neal lymph node dissection, omentectomy, and appendectomy also are performed.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ovarian cancer/pelvic mass

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Supine, dorsal lithotomy (if anticipating lower bowel resection)

                                                                                                                                                       Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Incision               Midline or paramedian abdominal

                     Special                CUSA, Vital View (suction-irrigation device combined with light source) helpful; laparoscopic bi-

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                       instrumentation      opsy forceps (laparoscope, laparoscopic instruments for evaluation of upper abdomen through
                                            lower vertical abdominal incision); Argon beam coagulator (ABC); TA, GIA, EEA stapling devices.

                     Unique                 Removal of large amounts of ascites may → fluid shifts and intravascular volume depletion in-
                       considerations       traop and postop. Consider preop prophylactic heparin. Most patients will have had bowel prep
                                            and will be hypovolemic at the start of surgery. Optimal debulking may require bowel resection,
                                            splenectomy, pancreatectomy, or other advanced procedure. During lymphadenectomy, there
                                            is a risk of vascular injury that may lead to significant blood loss and need for rapid volume
                                            replacement.

                     Antibiotics            Cefoxitin 2 g or Cefotetan 1–2 g iv; redose or as indicated by large EBL, duration of surgery.

                     Surgical time          1–5 h, including splenectomy and bowel surgery for more advanced stages

                     Closing                Consider NG tube placement by anesthesiologist (in select cases with extensive bowel involve-
                       considerations       ment or bowel procedures); peritoneal or central venous access for subsequent chemotherapy

                     EBL                    500–1000 mL; 250–500 mL for Stage I lesions; > 1000 mL for more advanced stages

                     Postop care            Extensive peritoneal raw surfaces → intraperitoneal fluid 3rd-spacing. Patients require aggres-
                                            sive hydration to maintain intravascular volume. Central hemodynamic monitoring and ICU admis-
                                            sion are useful in selected patients. Use SCDs and prophylactic heparin for VTE prophylaxis.

                     Mortality              1–2/1000

                     Morbidity              Grade 3-4 hemorrhage 7%
                                            Postop fever: 14–19%
                                            Wound infection: < 5%
                                            Wound dehiscence: 0.3–3%
                                            VTE: 1–2%
                                            Ureteral injury: < 1%
                                            Vaginal vault prolapse: Rare

                     Pain score             7–8

===== PAGE 762 =====
762   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               All age groups; most common, 60–69 yr, mean age 63

                                    Incidence               9.4/100,000 (22,280 new cases/yr); 1.4% lifetime risk of ovarian cancer

                                    Etiology                Unknown

                                    Risk factors            Family Hx of ovarian carcinoma; personal or family Hx of breast cancer (BRCA gene mutations);
                                                            ↑ age at first pregnancy; nulliparity; advancing age; late menopause; obesity; gonadal dysgen-
                                                            esis; exposure to radiation; environmental factors

                                    Associated              Familial cancer syndromes (e.g., Lynch, BRCA); Peutz-Jeghers syndrome—5% of cases develop
                                      conditions            gonadal stromal tumor; XY gonadal dysgenesis—gonadoblastomas; multiple nevoid basal cell
                                                            carcinoma (Gorlin’s syndrome); ataxia telangiectasia (hereditary, progressive cerebellar lack of
                                                            muscular coordination associated with recurrent pulmonary infections and ocular and cutaneous
                                                            telangiectasias)

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Ovarian carcinoma is usually diagnosed at a late stage, and therefore, the patient may have malignant ascites and
                                   pleural effusion, large tumor mass, and omental spread. Surgery is indicated for resection of localized tumor and for
                                   staging of distant and local metastases. Additional procedures, including bowel resection or lymph node dissection,
                                   may be performed at the same time.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Respiratory              Significant ascites and pleural fluid may produce respiratory compromise. The presence of
                                                            dyspnea, orthopnea, tachypnea, or other chest findings need to be investigated. Underly-
            Surgery

                                                            ing lung diseases, such as asthma, also may be exacerbated by the abdominal distension/
                                                            ascites.
                                                            Tests: Consider CXR; ± ABG; others as indicated from H&P. Consider pleural effusion
                                                            drainage preop if severe respiratory compromise.

                                   Cardiovascular           An ECHO or other studies may be requested to evaluate cardiac function. Exercise toler-
                                                            ance should be evaluated in every patient and any pre-existing cardiac disease explored in
                                                            the preop visit. Irreversible, dose-dependent cardiotoxicity may result from doxorubicin
                                                            chemotherapy.
                                                            Tests: Consider ECG, others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Gastrointestinal         Patient should have adequate preop iv hydration if given a bowel prep overnight. Opiate
                                                            use may cause ↓ GI motility. May be malnourished.

                                   Neurological             Not usually significant. Taxol and cisplatin may → peripheral neuropathy.

                                   Hematologic              Bone marrow suppression common following chemotherapy. Carboplatin, commonly
                                                            used for ovarian cancer, often induces thrombocytopenia.
                                                            Tests: CBC

                                   Laboratory               CBC, hepatic function, PT/PTT, T & S or T & cross, Assess renal function if large pelvic
                                                            mass at risk of causing postrenal impairment.

                                   Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural analgesia. Typically, a balanced anesthetic with inhalational agents and/or
                                   propofol infusion (25–150 mcg/kg/min) and narcotics. An epidural catheter may be placed for postop pain manage-
                                   ment and also may be used intraop to ↓ anesthetic requirements.

===== PAGE 763 =====
Staging Laparotomy for Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer                 763

                    Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2), though consider full stomach precautions if ascites present.

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Continue muscle relaxation based on nerve stimulator
                                              response. Epidural bupivacaine/narcotic combination if catheter is placed preop. Consider
                                              NG/OG tube. Patients with combined regional/GA may require increased fluids due to
                                              vasodilation and ↓ BP.

                    Emergence                 The patient may be extubated at the conclusion of surgery, unless hemodynamically unsta-
                                              ble and/or requiring continued vigorous fluid resuscitation. Reverse muscle relaxant with
                                              neostigmine 0.07 mg/kg and glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg, and give supplemental O2 after
                                              extubation. Consider postop ICU bed for unstable patients or those requiring invasive
                                              monitoring for fluid management.

                    Blood and fluid           Significant blood loss possible          Blood loss may be > 1 L. Order T & S or T & cross
                       requirements           IV: 16–18 ga × 2                         preop. 5% albumin or 6% hetastarch are useful for
                                              NS/LR at 4–6 mL/kg/h                     rapid volume replacement if Hct is acceptable. If
                                              5% albumin                               large volumes of ascites are removed, significant
                                              6% hetastarch                            ↓ BP may develop. Third-space losses may be sig-
                                                                                       nificant (≥10–15 mL/kg/h). Consider alternating
                                                                                       NS and LR to avoid development of a nonanion
                                                                                       gap hyperchloremic acidosis 2° NS. Warm fluids.
                                                                                       Strive to maintain euvolemia based on clinical data:
                                                                                       BP, HR, ABG, UO, EBL, and fluid shift estimates, ±
                                                                                       CVP, etc.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                              ± Arterial catheter                      Arterial and CVP catheters indicated for extensive

                                                                                                                                                         Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                              ± CVP catheter                           surgery and/or patients with significant comorbidi-
                                              Foley catheter                           ties (CHF, CAD, COPD, CKD, etc.).

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                    Positioning               ✓ and pad pressure points, especially
                                              important for longer surgeries
                                              ✓ eyes
                                              Antiembolism stockings and SCDs

                    Complications             Hypothermia                              Hypothermia likely to develop. Warm all iv fluids.
                                                                                       Heating blanket on bed and forced-air warming
                                                                                       blanket should be used.
                                              Coagulopathy                             Preop malnutrition and/or significant blood loss
                                                                                       may → coagulopathy

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Hemorrhage
                                              VTE                                      See p. B-8
                                              Ascites/pleural effusion
                                              Respiratory insufficiency
                                              PONV                                     See p. B-6

                    Pain                      PCA                                      See PCA and epidural narcotic recommendations
                      management              Epidural                                 on pages C-2 and C-3. Epidural may ↓ pain, PONV,
                                                                                       and risk of VTE.
                                              Adjuncts                                 Consider PO/IV tylenol, gabapentin, celebrex

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Berek JS, Longacre TA, Friedlander M: Ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancer. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s
                        Gynecology, 15th edition. Lippincott Williams, & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1350–1427.

===== PAGE 764 =====
764   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                     2. Cohn DE, Alvarez RD: High-grade serous carcinomas of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum. In: Karlan BY, Bristow RE,
                                        Li AJ, eds. Gynecologic Oncology Clinical Practice and Surgical Atlas. McGraw-Hill Professional, New York: 2012, 237–256.
                                     3. Copeland LJ: Epithelial ovarian cancer. In: DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, eds. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. CV Mosby, St Louis:
                                        2007, 289–350.
                                     4. Fleming GF, Ronnett BM, Seidman J, Zaino RJ, Rubin SC: Epithelial ovarian cancer. In: Barakat RR, Perelman RO, Markman
                                        M, Randal M, eds. Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams, & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                                        2009, 763–831.

                                   INTERVAL, SECONDARY CYTOREDUCTIVE, AND SECOND
                                   LOOK ASSESSMENT LAPAROTOMY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   In patients where neoadjuvant chemotherapy was utilized or when optimal debulking could not be performed at
                                   initial surgery, an interval (after 3–6 cycles of chemotherapy) or secondary debulking laparotomy is done to achieve
                                   optimal cytoreduction. Similar to primary cytoreduction, the surgery involves methodical and meticulous explora-
                                   tion of all of the abdomen and pelvis, multiple cytologies and biopsies, lysis of adhesions, and resection of the residual
                                   tumor, as well as the pelvic and periaortic lymph nodes (if not done at time of first surgery). Patients may also be
                                   candidates for secondary or tertiary cytoreductive surgical procedures, particularly if isolated recurrences are found
                                   in the setting of longer disease-free intervals.
                                   Description: Historically, surgery in the form of “second-look” laparotomy was undertaken to determine whether
                                   a patient was surgically and pathologically free of disease, after an appropriate number of treatment cycles with
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   platinum-based (CDDP or carboplatin) chemotherapy. However, 50% of patients with negative second-look surger-
                                   ies ultimately recur, and the number of second-look surgeries has decreased significantly in favor of noninvasive
            Surgery

                                   evaluation including the use of tumor markers (CA-125) and imaging techniques (CT, MRI, PET). Select patients
                                   will benefit from second-look surgery to guide further therapy. Intraabdominal assessment may be performed in
                                   conjunction with placement of an intraperitoneal port.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ovarian carcinoma

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                  Supine or dorsal lithotomy

                                    Incision                  Midline or paramedian vertical abdominal

                                    Antibiotics               Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv, further doses as indicated by large EBL, duration of surgery

                                    Surgical time             2–3 h

                                    Additional                Placement of permanent central venous or intraperitoneal access; Preoperatively consider pro-
                                      considerations          phylactic heparin

                                    EBL                       350–700 mL

                                    Postop care               PACU → ward

                                    Mortality                 1–2/1000

                                    Morbidity                 Postop fever: 14–19%
                                                              Wound infection: < 5%
                                                              Wound dehiscence: 0.3–3%
                                                              PE: 1–2%
                                                              Incisional hernia: 0.5–1%
                                                              Ureteral injury: 0.5–1%

                                    Pain score                7–8

===== PAGE 765 =====
Interval, Secondary Cytoreductive, and Second Look Assessment Laparotomy               765

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients undergoing interval cytoreductive laparotomy have generally been treated with 3–6 cycles of chemotherapy.
                   Depending on the type of adjunctive treatment given, the patient may come to surgery in poor physical condition
                   from malnutrition or toxicity from chemotherapy (see Table 8.1-1). Vascular access may be difficult to obtain due to
                   sclerosis or thrombosis of peripheral veins.

                    Respiratory                 Pulmonary function may be impaired by several chemotherapeutic drugs, most commonly
                                                bleomycin. Patients often have a Hickman catheter or other central line already in place,
                                                which can be used for induction of anesthesia. Consider preop CXR to assess the pres-
                                                ence of lung injury if prior chemo given. Patients with dyspnea at rest or with mild exer-
                                                tion, or who have known pulmonary fibrosis, should be evaluated by PFTs, including FVC,
                                                FEV1, MMEF25–75, and ABGs. Patients who received bleomycin should not receive O2 > 39%
                                                intraop, but arterial O2 saturation ideally should be kept ≥ 93%. The pulmonary toxicity of
                                                bleomycin is dose-related with a much higher incidence occurring if > 200 mg/m2 received.
                                                Combination chemotherapy with vincristine or cisplatin also increases pulmonary toxicity.
                                                Tests: Consider CXR; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Cardiovascular              Cardiotoxicity is seen with several antineoplastic agents, especially daunorubicin and
                                                doxorubicin. The cardiomyopathy produced by these drugs occurs in two forms: (1) acute—
                                                ST-T wave changes and dysrhythmias, which are transient and usually not a serious prob-
                                                lem; and (2) chronic—a dose-related toxicity manifested by CHF. Total doses of doxorubi-
                                                cin as low as 250 U can cause myocardial damage, but is more common at doses > 400 U.
                                                Cardiac irradiation, or combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, increases
                                                the risk of cardiac toxicity. Patients who have received cardiotoxic drugs are usually fol-

                                                                                                                                                     Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                lowed by serial ECHOs, and the results should be reviewed preop. Patients with CHF

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                                                or ECG changes should have a cardiology consultation preop to optimize their medical
                                                condition.
                                                Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P

                    Table 8.1-1. Toxicities of Selected Antineoplastic Chemotherapeutic Agents
                    Agent                                Toxic Effects
                    Vincristine, vinblastine             Neuropathies, SIADH, myelosuppression
                    Cyclophosphamide                     Prolonged neuromuscular block
                    Mechlorethamine                      Prolonged neuromuscular block
                    Bleomycin                            Pulmonary fibrosis
                    Doxorubicin, daunorubicin            Cardiotoxicity, GI upset, myelosuppression
                    Methotrexate                         Myelosuppression, GI upset, stomatitis, pulmonary infiltrates
                    Fluorouracil                         Myelosuppression, hepatic and GI alterations, nervous system dysfunction
                    Mercaptopurine                       Myelosuppression
                    Thioguanine                          Myelosuppression
                    Actinomycin D                        Myelosuppression, GI upset, stomatitis
                    Mitomycin                            Myelosuppression, GI upset
                    Cisplatin                            Myelosupression, GI upset, electrolyte disturbances, nephrotoxicity, peripheral
                                                         neuropathy
                    Carboplatin                          Myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy, GI upset, electrolyte disturbances
                    Paclitaxel                           Myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy, GI upset, arthralgia/myalgias, mucositis,
                                                         interstitial pneumonitis
                    Docetaxel                            Myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy, malaise, maculopapular rash, GI upset

===== PAGE 766 =====
766   CHAPTER 8.1        Gynecologic Oncology

                                   Neurological           Peripheral neuropathies are produced by vincristine, cyclophosphamide, Taxol (paclitaxel),
                                                          5-fluorouracil and several other drugs. Vincristine can also → SIADH. Other CNS effects
                                                          include N/V, seizure, and cerebellar dysfunction. A preop neurologic exam is useful for
                                                          patients with evidence of neurotoxicity. Document presence of neurologic deficits preop
                                                          for subsequent comparisons.

                                   Endocrine              Corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone) are commonly used with chemotherapeutic agents, as
                                                          treatment for pulmonary fibrosis and other complications of chemotherapy. The use of
                                                          > 10 mg prednisone (or equivalent) per day for > 2 wk suppresses the endogenous
                                                          secretion of the adrenal cortex, which may take up to 6 mo to recover fully. Hydro-
                                                          cortisone 100 mg iv, preop with an additional 2–3 subsequent doses q 8 h will provide
                                                          adequate “stress dose” coverage perioperatively. The dose is tapered rapidly over 2 or
                                                          3 d postop.
                                                          Tests: As indicated by the H&P

                                   Renal                  Many chemotherapeutic drugs have renal toxicity; therefore, renal function testing indi-
                                                          cated. Patients with impaired renal function should be given appropriate dosages of medi-
                                                          cations (e.g., antibiotics), which depend on renal excretion.
                                                          Tests: Renal function tests

                                   Musculoskeletal        Vincristine produces a neurotoxicity manifested by numbness and tingling in the extremi-
                                                          ties, weakness, foot drop, loss of reflexes, ataxia, and muscle pains. Muscle weakness in the
                                                          arms and legs indicates that the drug should be stopped. Muscle weakness may also involve
                                                          the larynx and extraocular eye muscles. Reduced amounts of NMBs should be used intraop
                                                          and a nerve stimulator used to follow twitches.

                                   Gastrointestinal       Consider hydration overnight if given a bowel prep or if there is significant N/V. Look for
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                          ascites and malnutrition.
                                                          Tests: Consider electrolytes, LFTs.
            Surgery

                                   Hematologic            Bone marrow suppression is a common side effect of antineoplastic drugs. The toxicity
                                                          usually produces a reversible drop in leukocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets, with a nadir
                                                          10–14 d posttreatment. Patients with a total neutrophil count of < 1000 should be kept in
                                                          isolation until counts improve. A low Plt count (< 50,000) is an indication for Plt transfu-
                                                          sion preop. Regional anesthesia in patients with thrombocytopenia needs to be considered
                                                          carefully due to ↑ risk of bleeding complications.

                                   Laboratory             Consider CBC, Cr, albumin, lytes, PT/PTT.

                                   Premedication          Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Stress-dose hydrocortisone (100 mg iv) if indicated.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or combined GETA/epidural. Consider CSE ± sedation if severe bleomycin pulmo-
                                   nary toxicity present.
                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction              Standard induction (see p. B-2). Consider renal function and surgery duration when decid-
                                                          ing on agents.

                                   Maintenance            Standard maintenance: see Anesthetic Considerations for Staging Laparotomy, p. 641.
                                                          An epidural may be used to reduce GA requirements (p. B-2).

                                   Emergence              Extubate when patient is responsive and neuromuscular block is fully reversed. In patients
                                                          with borderline pulmonary function, extubation may be delayed until patient is in the
                                                          PACU or ICU, and after ABG is checked while the patient breathes spontaneously. Con-
                                                          sider PONV prophylaxis (see p. B-6).

===== PAGE 767 =====
Interval, Secondary Cytoreductive, and Second Look Assessment Laparotomy                       767

                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Epidural                  2% lidocaine ± epinephrine 1:200,000 (10–20 mL) or 0.25% bupivacaine (10–20 mL) ini-
                                              tially; then at ~3–5 mL/h. Narcotics, such as morphine (2–4 mg) or hydromorphone (0.3–
                                              0.6 mg) may be given in the epidural for postop pain control.

                    Blood and fluid           IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2                         Excessive use of NS can lead to hyperchloremic
                       requirements           NS/LR at 7–10 mL/kg/h                      metabolic acidosis; therefore, alternating NS and
                                              Keep UO > 0.5 mL/kg/h                      LR solutions makes sense when giving large vol-
                                              Consider PRBC for Hct < 25%                umes of iv fluids.
                                              5% albumin                                 5% albumin or 6% hetastarch may be used as vol-
                                              6% hetastarch                              ume replacement, although no proven advantages
                                                                                         over crystalloid solutions.
                                              FFP/Plt                                    Consider FFP and Plt if evidence of significant coag-
                                                                                         ulopathy (↑ PT, ↑ PTT, ↓ Plt).

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                              ± Arterial line                            Consider arterial and CVP catheters for patients
                                              ± CVP catheter                             with compromised cardiac or pulmonary function
                                              Foley catheter                             or patients having extensive surgical procedures.

                    Positioning               3and pad pressure points                   It is useful to maintain access to at least one arm for
                                              3eyes                                      blood drawing and additional iv access.
                                              Anti-embolism stockings and SCD

                    Complications             Hypothermia                                Warm fluids; keep heating pad on bed; use forced-
                                                                                         air warmer
                                              Bleeding                                   3PT; PTT, Plts periodically if large blood loss

                                                                                                                                                            Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             Bleeding
                                              Infection
                                              PONV (see p. B-6)
                                              Respiratory insufficiency
                                              VTE (see p. B-8)

                    Pain                      PCA (see p. C-3).                          Surgeons may infiltrate wound edges with 0.25%
                      management              Epidural/spinal narcotics (see             bupivacaine in those patients without epidurals.
                                              p. C-2).                                   Consider iv ketorolac (30 mg)

                    Tests                     CXR                                        As indicated by postop clinical findings.
                                              ABG

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Berek JS, Longacre TA, Friedlander M: Ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancer. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s
                        Gynecology, 15th edition. Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1350–1427.
                     2. Chabner BA, Bertino J, Cleary J, et al: Cytotoxic agents. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LE, Gilman AG, eds. Goodman and
                        Gilman’s: The Pharmacologic Basis of Therapeutics, 12th edition. McGraw Hill, New York: 2011, 1677–730.
                     3. DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT: Epithelial ovarian cancer. In: DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, eds. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. CV
                        Mosby, St. Louis: 2002, 289–350.
                     4. Fleming GF, Ronnett BM, Seidman J, et al: Epithelial ovarian cancer. In: Barakat RR, Perelman RO, Markman M,
                        Randal M, eds. Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams, & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                        2009, 763–831.

===== PAGE 768 =====
768   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                   RADICAL VULVECTOMY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Historically, invasive vulvar carcinoma has been treated with en bloc dissection of the inguinal-femoral
                                   region and the vulva. The surgery involves bilateral excision of lymphatic and areolar tissue in the inguinal and femo-
                                   ral regions, combined with removal of the entire vulva between the labia-crural folds, from the perineal body to the
                                   upper margin of mons pubis (Fig. 8.1-2). A large surgical wound is created and, if 1° closure without tension is not
                                   possible, a skin or myocutaneous graft may be necessary. Deep pelvic nodes are almost never involved with metasta-
                                   ses when the superficial and deep groin nodes are free of disease; therefore, a pelvic lymphadenectomy is no longer
                                   routinely performed. If presence of tumor is documented in the groin nodes, particularly in Cloquet’s sentinel nodes
                                   (the most cephalad, deep inguinal nodes), a deep pelvic lymphadenectomy may be performed. Postop radiation
                                   therapy, however, is widely used instead of a pelvic lymph node dissection to minimize operative morbidity and
                                   confer a survival advantage.
                                   A skin incision in the shape of a bull’s head (Fig. 8.1-2) allows access to the inguinal-femoral region. (The incision
                                   ideally should extend 2+ cm beyond the tumor margin.) The inguinal ligament and rectus fascia should be cleared
                                   bilaterally of all nodal tissues and the fossae ovalis on both sides identified. The lateral aspect of the femoral sheath is
                                   incised along the sartorius muscle, with care being taken not to injure the femoral nerve or vessels, and the cribriform
                                   fascia is cleaned off the femoral artery. The external pudendal artery, which marks the entrance of the saphenous vein
                                   into the fossa ovalis, should be identified and ligated. The proximal and distal segments of the saphenous vein should
                                   be ligated and excised as the fibrofatty, lymph-bearing tissue of the femoral sheath is resected. Cloquet’s nodes at
                                   the femoral ring beneath the inguinal ligaments on both sides should be resected and submitted for frozen-section
                                   pathology evaluation. The deep inguinal lymphatic chain is removed on both sides by opening the inguinal canal
                                   from the external inguinal ring. The vulvar incision is carried down through the labia-crural folds. The internal
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   pudendal vessels at the posterior lateral margin of the vulvar incision are identified as they emerge from Alcock’s
                                   canal, and then they are ligated and incised.
            Surgery

                                   Use of electrocautery in this portion of the procedure usually tends to decrease operative blood loss. The dissection
                                   is continued along the periosteum of the symphysis at the level of the fascia of the deep muscles of the urogenital
                                   diaphragm. The bulbocavernosus, ischiocavernosus, and superficial transverse perinei muscles are removed. A cir-
                                   cumferential vaginal incision, excluding the urethral meatus, is then performed and the vulva is removed. The inci-
                                   sions overlying the groin node dissections should be closed with minimal tension after placement of closed-suction
                                   Jackson-Pratt drains. The vulvar surgical wound is closed by slightly undermining the skin of the edges of the incision

                                             Figure 8.1-2. En bloc radical vulvectomy incisions shown; bilateral inguinal
                                             lymphadenectomy is complete. (Reproduced with permission from Rock JA, Thompson
                                             JD: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 8th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

===== PAGE 769 =====
Radical Vulvectomy      769

                               Figure 8.1-3. 3-incision radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinofemeral lympha-
                               denectomy. (Produced with permission from Rock JA, Thompson JD: TeLinde’s
                               Operative Gynecology, 8th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

                   and suturing them to the vaginal mucosa. A vulvar reconstruction, using myocutaneous flaps, also can be performed
                   at this time (see Pelvic Exenteration, p. 781).

                                                                                                                                                 Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Variant procedure or approaches: In 1962, Byran and associates popularized a 3-incision technique first

                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                   described by Kehrer in 1918. This 3-incision technique, with separate vulva and groin incisions, is the most common
                   approach (Fig. 8.1-3). This operative approach has led to a significant decrease in wound infection and breakdown,
                   apparently without increasing tumor recurrence in the inguinal dermal bridge above the symphysis pubis. Another
                   variant is the hemivulvectomy (Fig. 8.1-4), in which unilateral radical hemivulvectomy and groin node dissection are
                   performed in selected stage I, nonmidline, unifocal vulvar cancer patients. This procedure will minimize morbidity,
                   disfigurement, and sexual dysfunction. The observation that almost no contralateral groin metastases occur in the

                               Figure 8.1-4. Unilateral lymphadenectomy for a well-lateralized lesion. (Produced
                               with permission from Rock JA, Thompson JD: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology,
                               8th edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

===== PAGE 770 =====
770   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                   absence of positive ipsilateral groin nodes allows the surgeon to perform only a unilateral groin node dissection.
                                   Recent trials have shown sentinel lymph node mapping may be an alternative to groin lymphadenectomy in select
                                   patients with early stage disease. For this approach, a radioactive tracer is injected intradermally 20–30 min before
                                   groin incision. Blue dye is also injected to improve visualization, but this is done after the patient is prepped due to
                                   the rapid movement of the dye to lymphoid tissue. Using both radioactivity and direct visualization allows identi-
                                   fication of the sentinel lymph node. If a sentinel lymph node(s) is not found, full lymphadenectomy is performed.
                                   Benefits of this approach include less dissection of tissue and lower rates of postoperative complications.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Invasive vulvar cancer

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                            En Bloc Dissection                    3-Incision                    Hemivulvectomy

                                    Position                Modified dorsolithotomy in Allen      ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            universal stirrups

                                    Incision                Bull’s head, from iliac crest to      2 separate groin incisions    1 or 2 separate groin inci-
                                                            iliac crest and along labia-crural    from iliac crest to pubic     sions from iliac crest to
                                                            folds (Fig. 8.1-2)                    tubercle; 1 vulvar incision   pubic tubercle; vulvar inci-
                                                                                                  (Fig. 8.1-3)                  sion (Fig. 8.1-4)

                                    Special                 Argon Beam Coagulator                 ⇐                             ⇐
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Two-team approach to minimize         ⇐                             ⇐
                                      considerations        surgical time. Preop bowel prep
                                                            and constipating medications
                                                            (e.g., Lomotil) to ↓ postop bowel
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                            movements. Consider pre-
                                                            operative prophylactic heparin
            Surgery

                                    Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv   ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Surgical time           3–4 h                                 ⇐                             2–3 h

                                    Closing                 Possible skin graft; vulvar and       ⇐                             ⇐
                                      considerations        groin suction drains

                                    EBL                     500–1000 mL                           ⇐                             250–500 mL

                                    Postop care             PACU or ICU, if necessary;            ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            aggressive local wound care. VTE
                                                             prophylaxis (see Appendix B).
                                                             NB: trauma to femoral vessels at
                                                             time of groin lymph node dissec-
                                                             tion increases risk of thrombo-
                                                             phlebitis and PE.

                                    Mortality               1–2%                                  ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Wound infection and breakdown:        15%                           < 15%
                                                            40–80%
                                                            Introital stenosis and dyspareunia:   ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            50%
                                                            Lymphedema of lower extremi-          ⇐                             < 25% (if deep groin nodes
                                                            ties: 25–30%                                                        not dissected)
                                                            Lymphocysts: 10%                      ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            Genital prolapse: 7%                  ⇐                             1–2%
                                                            Stress incontinence: 5%               ⇐                             1–2%
                                                            Thrombophlebitis: 3–5%                ⇐                             1–2%
                                                            Hernia: 1–2%                          ⇐                             ⇐
                                                            PE: 1–2%                              ⇐                             ⇐

                                    Pain score              8                                     8                             7

===== PAGE 771 =====
Radical Vulvectomy   771

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Median = 70 yr

                     Incidence                2.2/100,000; 4% of female genital malignancies

                     Etiology                 Two pathways of vulvar cancer are thought to exist, one related to HPV infection and the
                                              second related to chronic inflammation or an autoimmune process.

                     Risk factors             HPV infection, vulvar dystrophies, tobacco use, immunosuppression, HIV

                     Associated conditions    Bowen’s disease, condyloma acuminata, diabetes, obesity, HTN, arteriosclerosis, cervical
                                              malignancy

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Patients with vulvar carcinoma are usually elderly. Consider and evaluate coexisting medical conditions, including
                   HTN, CAD, and diabetes. Radical vulvectomy is performed for invasive tumor that has not metastasized to distant sites.

                    Respiratory              The presence of lung disease and smoking Hx should be discussed with the patient preop.
                                             Consider CXR and PFTs for patients with significant respiratory disease.
                                             Tests: Others as indicated from H&P.

                    Cardiovascular           There is an increased incidence of HTN and atherosclerosis in these patients. A cardiology
                                             consultation is indicated for angina, recent MI, CHF, or heart murmurs. Review ECG

                                                                                                                                                     Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                             (< 1 yr) for patients > 60.
                                             Tests: ECG; others as indicated from H&P.

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                    Renal                    With age, creatinine clearance decreases 2° ↓ renal mass, but serum creatinine remains
                                             unchanged because of decreased muscle mass.
                                             Tests: Serum creatine; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Gastrointestinal         Patients should have iv hydration preop if given bowel prep overnight.

                    Neurological             Document a neurological exam if Hx of stroke, Sz, or other neurologic disease. Hx of
                                             peripheral neuropathy or autonomic dysfunction should be assessed in diabetic patients.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P.

                    Endocrine                Diabetes, obesity, and hypothyroidism are common in this patient population.
                                             Tests: Fasting blood sugar; thyroid function; others as indicated from H&P.

                    Hematologic              Chronic anemia may be present.
                                             Tests: Hb/Hct; Plt count

                    Laboratory               Cr, if age > 65 (cr = creatinine)

                    Premedication            Consider midazolam iv 1–2 mg.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA or regional anesthesia, alone or in combination.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                    Emergence                No special considerations

===== PAGE 772 =====
772   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                   Regional anesthesia:

                                   Epidural                   2% lidocaine ± epinephrine 1:200,000 (10–20 mL) or 0.25% bupivacaine (10–20 mL) are
                                                              used; then at ~3–5 mL/h. Narcotics such as morphine (2–4 mg) in the epidural for postop
                                                              pain control.

                                   CSE                        Hyperbaric bupivacaine (10–12 mg), ± preservative-free morphine (0.1–0.2 mg) → T10
                                                              sensory level.

                                   Blood and fluid            IV: 16–18 ga × 2                            Occasionally, femoral vessels may be injured, requir-
                                      requirements            NS/LR at 6–8 mL/kg/h                        ing rapid blood replacement. Consider PRBCs for
                                                              Warm iv fluids                              Hct < 21% in healthy patients and < 25% in patients
                                                              UO > 0.5 mL/kg/h                            with cardiac or pulmonary disease.

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (p. B-1)                  Invasive monitors indicated for patients in poor
                                                              ± Arterial line                             condition or with cardiovascular or respiratory dis-
                                                              ± CVP line                                  ease. An arterial catheter is useful for drawing labs
                                                              Foley catheter                              in surgery to check Hct, coags, glucose, or ABGs.

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                                              3 eyes
                                                              Antiembolism stockings and SCD

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Hypothermia
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                              Bleeding
                                                              PONV                                        See p. B-6.
            Surgery

                                                              VTE                                         See p. B-8.

                                   Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                                Incisions may be left open to granulate in or be
                                     management                                                           covered with skin grafts. Epidural analgesia allows
                                                                                                          earlier ambulation with less sedation in elderly
                                                              Epidural or spinal narcotics (p. C-2)       patients.

                                   Tests                      Tests as indicated from postop
                                                              clinical findings

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT: Invasive cancer of the vulva. In: DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, eds. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. CV
                                       Mosby, St. Louis: 2002, 211–39.
                                    2. Eifel P, Levenback C: Surgery for vulvar cancer. In: American Cancer Society Atlas of Clinical Oncology, Cancer of the Female
                                       Lower Genital Tract. BC Decker, Hamilton: 2001, 203–16.
                                    3. Hacker NF: Vulvar cancer. In: Berek JS, Hacker NF, eds. Practical Gynecologic Oncology, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                       Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2004, 543–83.
                                    4. Hoffman MS: Malignancies of the vulva. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology. Lippincott
                                       Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003, 1293–1350.
                                    5. Holschneider CH, Berek JS: Vulvar cancer. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 15th edition. Lippincott Williams
                                       & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 1428–57.
                                    6. Moore DH, Koh WJ, McGuire W, et al: In: Barakat RR, Perelman RO, Markman M, Randal M, eds. Principles and Practice of
                                       Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009, 553–90.

===== PAGE 773 =====
Conization of the Cervix        773

                   CONIZATION OF THE CERVIX
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Conization of the cervix can be used
                   for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. It is
                   performed in cases of biopsy-proven dysplasia with
                   unsatisfactory colposcopy (inadequate visualization
                   of the endocervical canal) or following endocervi-
                   cal curettage showing dysplasia or atypical glandular
                   epithelial cells (Fig. 8.1-5). Persistent abnormal cytol-
                   ogy associated with normal colposcopy, colposcopic
                   suspicion of invasion, and/or cervical biopsy showing
                   microinvasive cancer is also an indication for this pro-
                   cedure. The surgery consists of the annular removal
                   of a cone-shaped wedge of tissue from the cervix with
                   a scalpel. With the advent of the LEEP (loop electro-
                   surgical excision procedure), most cone biopsies are
                   done under local paracervical/intracervical block in
                   an office setting and do not require the services of an
                   anesthesiologist.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: In selected pa-
                   tients, a laser is used in place of the scalpel. This pro-
                   cedure can be performed under local anesthesia with

                                                                                                                                                         Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   less blood loss, but operative time is usually longer.
                   The thermal effect of the laser at the cone margins, al-   Figure 8.1-5. Cut across endocervix to complete

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                   though usually minimal, may interfere with pathologic      cone excision.
                   interpretation. In pregnant patients, a shallower cone
                   is done to minimize complications. Approximately 1%
                   of women with cervical carcinoma are pregnant at the time of diagnosis, and 1/1240 pregnancies is complicated by
                   cervical cancer. Recognition and therapy of preinvasive cervical lesions during pregnancy, therefore, are of para-
                   mount importance. Because of the increased vascularity of the pregnant uterus and cervix, conization is usually
                   associated with increased blood loss and morbidity.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cervical dysplasia

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                              Shallow Cone In
                                             Conization                           Laser Conization            Pregnancy

                     Position                Lithotomy                            ⇐                           Lithotomy; with left lateral tilt
                                                                                                              in 3rd trimester

                     Incision                Cervical                             ⇐                           ⇐

                     Special                 Colposcope                           CO2 laser; protective eye   Colposcope
                       instrumentation                                            wear; colposcope

                     Unique                  Infiltration of cervix with dilute   ⇐                            Phenylephrine, vasopressin,
                       considerations        vasopressin or phenylephrine                                      or epinephrine should not
                                             solution. A 1:200,000 epi-                                        be used during pregnancy.
                                             nephrine solution also can be                                    Liberal use of hemostatic
                                             used. Vaginal pack necessary                                      sutures should be made.
                                             in selected patients.

                     Antibiotics             None                                 ⇐                           ⇐

===== PAGE 774 =====
774   CHAPTER 8.1                Gynecologic Oncology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                    Surgical time                  30–60 min                                 30–90 min                             ⇐

                                    EBL                            50–200 mL                                 50 mL                                 100–350 mL

                                    Postop care                    Monitor for postop bleeding               ⇐                                     ⇐

                                    Mortality                      < 0.01%                                   ⇐                                     ⇐

                                    Morbidity                      Hemorrhage: 5–10%                         ⇐                                     10–15%
                                                                   Preterm delivery: 16%                     ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Cervical stenosis: 2–3%                   ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Dysmenorrhea: Rare                        ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Infertility: Rare                         ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Injury to rectum and bladder:             ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Rare
                                                                   Pelvic cellulitis: Rare                   ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                   Uterine perforation: Rare                 ⇐                                     ⇐
                                                                                                                                                   Fetal loss: 10–15% (up to
                                                                                                                                                   30% in 1st trimester)*
                                                                                                                                                   Premature labor: 5–10%
                                                                                                                                                   (controversial)
                                                                                                                                                   Rupture of membrane: 2–5%

                                    Pain score                     3                                         3                                     3

                                    *The naturally higher incidence of spontaneous miscarriages in the 1st trimester contributes to this figure.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
            Surgery

                                    Age range                      Reproductive and postreproductive years

                                    Incidence                      ~5% of Pap smears (+ for dysplasia); 10–17% of patients who undergo colposcopic exams

                                    Etiology                       Majority of cervical dysplasia is caused by persistent HPV infections

                                    Risk factors                   Smoking; human papilloma virus (HPV); herpes simplex virus (HSV); multiple sexual partners; early
                                                                   age of onset of coitus; multiparity; lower socioeconomic status; HIV; immunocompromised hosts

                                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   Conization is done for diagnosis and treatment of cervical lesions. Occasionally it is necessary to perform the pro-
                                   cedure during pregnancy, which increases the risk of bleeding complications. The effect of anesthetic agents on the
                                   fetus (especially 1st trimester) also needs to be considered when choosing anesthetic technique (see p. 852).

                                   Respiratory                      Not significant unless underlying lung disease.

                                   Cardiovascular                   These patients are generally young and, therefore, less likely to have significant heart
                                                                    disease.

                                   Neurological                     Usually not significant, unless there is Hx of seizure disorder or other neurologic illness.

                                   Hematologic                      Consider hemogram

                                   Laboratory                       Consider pregnancy test

                                   Premedication                    Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv (though generally held if pregnant).

===== PAGE 775 =====
Conization of the Cervix        775

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Usually a local or MAC anesthetic; occasionally, GETA or spinal. Pregnancy makes it desir-
                   able to perform the procedure under local or regional anesthesia if appropriate (1% of cases).
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                  Standard induction (p. B-2). If pregnant patient, rapid-sequence induction (p. B-5) with
                                               cricoid pressure is appropriate if > 12 weeks gestation.

                    Maintenance                Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                    Emergence                  No special issues

                   Regional anesthesia: Both spinal and epidural techniques are acceptable and may be preferred for pregnant
                   patients who cannot tolerate local anesthesia. Prehydration with 1000 mL LR before block is recommended. Treat
                   ↓ BP with ephedrine 5–10 mg iv, or phenylephrine 50–100 mcg, titrated to effect.

                    Blood and fluid            Minimal blood loss
                       requirements            IV: 18–20 ga × 1
                                               NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                               Fetal monitoring may be indicated
                                               for viable pregnancies
                                                                                           *NB peroneal nerve compression at lateral fibular

                                                                                                                                                                Obstetric/Gynecologic
                    Positioning                3 and pad pressure points
                                               3 eyes                                      head → foot drop.
                                                                                           Left uterine displacement with a wedge under mat-

                                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                                               Left uterine displacement
                                                                                           tress should be used for pregnant patients (after
                                                                                           ~20 wk) or earlier gestation if cardiovascular com-
                                                                                           promise when supine.
                                               Antiembolic stockings + SCD

                    Complications              Laser eye damage                            If a laser is used, eye protection is required for the
                                               Fire                                        patient and all OR personnel; be alert for fire haz-
                                               Premature labor (if pregnant)               ards when using a laser.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Peroneal nerve injury (2° lithotomy Nerve injury manifested as foot drop and loss of
                                                position)                           sensation over dorsum of foot.
                                                PONV                                See p. B-6.
                                                Premature labor
                                                Bleeding
                    Pain                        Oral analgesics                             Consider acetaminophen alone or in combina-
                      management                                                            tion with opiates (Vicodin, Percocet) ± NSAIDs
                                                                                            (if not pregnant).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Copeland LJ, Landon MB: Malignant disease in pregnancy. In: Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL, eds. Obstetrics: Normal and
                        Problem Pregnancies. Churchill Livingstone, New York: 2002, 1255–81.
                     2. DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT: Cancer in pregnancy. In: DiSaia PJ, Creasman WT, eds. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. CV Mosby,
                        St. Louis: 2000, 439–72.
                     3. Simeoens C, Goffin F, Simon P, et al: Adverse obstetrical outcomes after treatment of precancerous cervical lesions: a Belgian
                        multicentre study. BJOG 2012; 119:1247–55.

===== PAGE 776 =====
776   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                   ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR LASER THERAPY
                                   TO VULVA, VAGINA, CERVIX

                                        Preoperative
                                   Laser therapy is indicated for preinvasive lesions of the vulva, vagina, or cervix. It destroys tissues by the selective
                                   application of light energy focused into a beam. Vaporized tissues tend to heal without scarring, and blood loss is
                                   minimal due to the cauterizing effect of the laser. Many gynecological laser procedures are done with local anesthesia
                                   in the clinic setting and do not require the services of an anesthesiologist.

                                   Respiratory               Not significant, unless there is underlying lung disease.

                                   Cardiovascular            In elderly patients, exercise tolerance should be assessed.
                                                             Tests: ECG if > 60 yr

                                   Hematologic               Tests: Hct

                                   Laboratory                Consider pregnancy test in young women

                                   Premedication             Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Anesthetic technique: Usually MAC; GETA/LMA or regional technique may be used. Sedation with propofol,
                                   midazolam, and fentanyl in small doses usually is effective.
            Surgery

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2)

                                   Maintenance               Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation not necessary. A technique with rela-
                                                             tively rapid emergence (e.g., propofol and/or sevoflurane/desflurane/N2O combinations) is
                                                             useful for outpatient surgery.

                                   Emergence                 Limit opiates

                                   Regional anesthesia: Spinal, epidural anesthesia, or CSE may be used with a sensory level to T10. Provide supple-
                                   mental O2 if iv sedation given.

                                   Spinal                    A T10 sensory level is desirable; hyperbaric bupivacaine 10–12 mg can be used. Small-
                                                             diameter spinal needles (e.g., 25-ga Sprotte needles) minimize chance of postdural punc-
                                                             ture headache (PDPH).

                                   Epidural                  2% lidocaine, ± epinephrine 1:200,000 (10–15 mL), or 0.25% bupivacaine (10–15 mL) is
                                                             used; redose as needed with 3–5 mL. Narcotics, such as morphine (2–4 mg) or hydromor-
                                                             phone (0.3–0.6 mg), may be given in the epidural for postop pain control.

                                   Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss
                                      requirements           IV: 18 ga × 1
                                                             NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h                    Consider prehydrating patient if using neuraxial
                                                                                                     block.

===== PAGE 777 =====
Suction Curettage for Gestational Trophoblastic Disease              777

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1).

                    Positioning               3 and pad pressure points
                                              3 eyes
                                              Antiembolic stockings + SCDs

                    Complications             Eye injury                                 Goggles should be worn by the patient and all OR
                                              OR fires                                   personnel during laser use to prevent injury to eyes.
                                              Aerosolization of viral particles          Whenever laser is in use, be prepared for fires:
                                                                                         know where fire extinguisher is located, and watch
                                                                                         for improper handling of lasers.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             PONV                                       See p. B-6.
                                              PDPH                                       PDPH may require epidural blood patch for
                                                                                         treatment.

                    Pain                      Oral analgesics                            Consider acetaminophen alone or with opiates
                      management                                                         (Vicodin, Percocet) ± NSAIDs.

                   Suggested Reading
                     1. Garcia F, Hatch KD, Berek JS: Intraepithelial disease of the cervix, vagina, and vulva. In: Berek JS, eds. Berek & Novak’s
                        Gynecology. 15th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2011, 574–618.

                                                                                                                                                            Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                   SUCTION CURETTAGE FOR GESTATIONAL
                   TROPHOBLASTIC DISEASE
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Suction curettage is the most efficient method of evacuating a gestational trophoblastic neoplasm
                   (mole). The procedure involves dilation of the cervix by instruments or by laminaria tents, followed by insertion of
                   suction cannula of appropriate diameter into the uterine cavity. Standard negative pressures used are in the range of
                   30–70 mm Hg. IV oxytocin—to maintain uterine contraction and minimize blood loss—is started after a moderate
                   amount of tissue has been removed. Suction curettage is followed by gentle, sharp curettage of the uterus to ensure
                   adequate evacuation. Currettage may be performed under ultrasound guidance to decrease the risk of uterine perfo-
                   ration and to ensure adequate evacuation. Paracervical injection of dilute vasopressin solution or 1% lidocaine with
                   1:200,000 epinephrine may decrease operative blood loss (in cases not complicated by thyrotoxicosis or HTN).
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Evacuation of a mole > 16 wk gestation size is associated with a signifi-
                   cant risk of trophoblastic embolization and cardiorespiratory compromise (2° pulmonary HTN/edema, cyanosis,
                   ↓ CO, ↓ BP, right heart failure). Consider hemodynamic monitoring with TEE or a CVP catheter to manage
                   cardiovascular changes associated with trophoblastic embolization and to prevent inadvertent fluid overload. In
                   general, earlier diagnosis of molar pregnancies has decreased the incidence of complications such as HTN and
                   thyroxicosis.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD)

===== PAGE 778 =====
778   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                                               Figure 8.1-6. Suction curettage of a molar pregnancy.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                           Small Mole < 16 Wks’ Size                           Large Mole > 16 Wks’ Size
            Surgery

                                    Position               Lithotomy                                           ⇐

                                    Incision               None                                                ⇐

                                    Special                Suction evacuation kit                              ⇐
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                 If mole > 12 wk size, laparotomy setup should       ⇐ ± central hemodynamic monitoring with
                                      considerations       be readily available. Oxytocin drip, anesthesia,    TEE or CVP catheter; avoid overzealous use
                                                           or surgery may precipitate thyroid storm. If        of fluids
                                                           hyperthyroidism is suspected before induction
                                                           of anesthesia, beta-blockers should used. In
                                                           PACU, monitor for signs of trophoblastic em-
                                                           bolization or amniotic fluid embolus. If patient
                                                           is Rh negative, give Rhogam.

                                    Antibiotics            Cefotetan 2 g iv or doxycycline 200 mg po before   ⇐
                                                           procedure and 100 mg po after procedure.

                                    Surgical time          30–60 min                                           ⇐

                                    EBL                    200–400 mL                                          ⇐

                                    Postop care            Outpatient (usually)                                Consider inpatient observation or ICU admission.

                                    Mortality              Rare                                                ⇐

                                    Morbidity              Trophoblastic embolization: rare                    11–27%
                                                           Excessive bleeding: 2%                              10%
                                                           Infection: < 2%                                     ⇐
                                                           Uterine perforation: < 1%                           1–2%
                                                                                                               Acute pulmonary edema: 2–11%

                                    Pain score             3                                                   3

===== PAGE 779 =====
Suction Curettage for Gestational Trophoblastic Disease         779

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Reproductive age group

                     Incidence             1/1000 deliveries in the United States

                     Etiology              Genetics: androgenous (all chromosomes in true moles are paternal in origin); nutritional defi-
                                           ciency: protein, folic acid, carotene (vitamin A)

                     Risk factors          Extremes of reproductive age, prior GTD (incidence 0.6–2.0%), Asian, Hispanic populations

                     Associated            Hyperemesis gravidarum (2° ↑ levels of HCG); preeclampsia in 1st trimester; thyrotoxicosis
                       conditions          (because of its analogy to TSH molecule, ↑ levels of HCG can bind TSH receptors and cause
                                           thyrotoxicosis)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Some 80% of cases are diagnosed at 12–18 wk of development. Most patients have an unusually large uterus for
                   the length of the pregnancy, and vaginal bleeding is common. Trophoblastic disease is classified by the degree of
                   invasiveness; retained mole is the most common type, and the least invasive; invasive mole involves the wall of
                   the uterus; and metastatic mole involves more distant sites. Chemotherapy with methotrexate and actinomycin
                   D usually is given postop for invasive or metastatic disease. (See Table 8.1-1 for toxicities of chemotherapeutic
                   agents.)

                    Respiratory             Pulmonary edema may complicate preeclampsia, which occurs in 25% of patients with

                                                                                                                                                    Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                            GTD. If respiratory distress is present, it also may be 2° embolization of tumor to lungs.
                                            Avoid overhydration → pulmonary complications in patients with large moles.

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                            Tests: Consider preop ABG if pulmonary function impaired and in patients at high risk of
                                            developing trophoblastic embolization. Others as indicated by H&P.

                    Cardiovascular          Dehydration and/or ↓ blood volume may exist due to hyperemesis and vaginal bleeding.
                                            Adequate hydration should be given preop if patient shows Sx of hypovolemia (e.g., tachy-
                                            cardia, orthostatic ↓ BP, low UO). Preeclampsia also may complicate this disease and can be
                                            diagnosed by HTN, proteinuria, ± edema. If the patient has severe preeclampsia, invasive
                                            monitoring of BP may be advisable. Also, if patient is receiving Mg++ therapy, a serum level
                                            should be 3’d preop. Mg++ therapy may inhibit myocardial contractility in high doses. Ca++
                                            is the preferred antidote for myocardial depression. MgSO4 → uterine atony → ↑ blood loss.

                    Neurological            Sz prophylaxis with Mg++ is indicated for women with preeclampsia. Magnesium 4–6 mg
                                            loading dose iv over 20 min, then 1–2 g/h maintenance infusion. A 2nd bolus of 2 g over
                                            5 min can be administered if the initial bolus dose is complete. If Sz occurs a small dose of
                                            propofol (20–40) mg or midazolam (1–2 mg) should be given iv and respiration assisted
                                            with supplemental O2 by mask. The trachea should be intubated for airway protection in
                                            patients with full stomachs and in those who are difficult to ventilate by mask.

                    Musculoskeletal         3reflexes if patient has received Mg++. Reduce amount of muscle relaxant to compensate
                                            for the effects of Mg++ on muscle strength.

                    Hematologic             Anemia may be masked by hypovolemia. Rh– patients with Rh+ partners should receive
                                            300 mcg of Rh immune globulin (RhoGAM) within 72 h postop to ↓ possibility of Rh iso-
                                            immunization in future pregnancies.
                                            Tests: CBC; 3 Plt in preeclamptics. If patient has received chemotherapy recently, 3 HCT;
                                            complete blood count (WBC, Plt).

                    Endocrine               Hyperthyroidism occurs in 5% of women with hydatidiform moles and is 2° the thyroid-
                                            stimulating effects of HCG.
                                            Tests: Thyroid function tests should be 3’d preop in women with Sx of hyperthyroidism,
                                            and managed before surgery.

===== PAGE 780 =====
780   CHAPTER 8.1        Gynecologic Oncology

                                   Laboratory              Serum HCG level; consider thyroid function tests; LFTs; PT; PTT; Plt count; Mg++ level;
                                                           UA—as indicated from H&P, T&S or T&C.

                                   Premedication           Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Usually GETA, although may be carried out under spinal or epidural anesthesia.
                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction               A rapid-sequence induction (p. B-5) with cricoid pressure should be used. For RSI, con-
                                                           sider supplementation with labetalol, hydralazine, esmolol, or remifentanil to obtund exag-
                                                           gerated laryngoscopic hypertensive response in preeclampsia.

                                   Maintenance             Standard maintenance (p. B-3). Control BP, if preeclamptic, with labetalol, hydralazine, or
                                                           SNP. Try to keep DBP at 90–100 mm Hg. NDMR potentiated by magnesium.

                                   Emergence               Extubate when fully awake and protective airway reflexes have returned. Consider PONV
                                                           prophylaxis.

                                   Regional anesthesia:

                                   Spinal                  A T10 sensory level is desirable; hyperbaric bupivacaine (10–12 mg) may be used.

                                   Epidural                Use 2% lidocaine ± epinephrine 1:200,000 (10–20 mL) or 0.25% bupivacaine (10–15 mL)
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Blood and fluid         Possible large blood loss              One large-volume iv line should be placed and
                                      requirements         IV: 16–18 ga × 1                       blood readily available. The usual causes of bleed-
            Surgery

                                                           NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h                   ing are uterine perforation, cervical laceration,
                                                                                                  or uterine atony. Cautious use of fluids if on
                                                                                                  magnesium infusion due to risk of pulmonary
                                                                                                  edema.

                                   Control of              Oxytocin (30–40 U/L) infusion          Oxytocin is begun about halfway through pro-
                                     bleeding                                                     cedure at 250 mL/h (consult obstetrician). Large
                                                                                                  oxytocin boluses may → ↓ BP.
                                                           ↑ % volatile anesthetic may →           Try to keep anesthetic < 1 MAC to prevent uterine
                                                           ↓ uterine tone                          relaxation.
                                                           Methylergonovine maleate 0.2 mg         Methylergonovine may be given for severe bleed-
                                                           im                                      ing. Because this drug can cause HTN, it is con-
                                                                                                   traindicated in any hypertensive etiology (e.g.,
                                                                                                   preeclampsia).

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (p. B-1)
                                                           ± Arterial catheter                    An arterial catheter ± CVP are indicated in cases of
                                                           ± CVP/PA catheter                      thyrotoxicosis, preeclampsia, or significant hemor-
                                                           Foley catheter                         rhage. The use of vasodilators, such as SNP, is also
                                                                                                  an indication for invasive monitoring.

                                   Positioning             3 and pad pressure points              * NB: peroneal nerve compression at lateral fibular
                                                           3 eyes                                 head → foot drop.
                                                           TEDS + SCDS

                                   Complications           Embolization of trophoblastic          Embolization may occur, especially if > 16 wk ges-
                                                           material                               tation. Significant respiratory and cardiac compro-
                                                                                                  mise may occur, requiring postop ventilation and
                                                                                                  PEEP, hemodynamic support, ICU.

===== PAGE 781 =====
Pelvic Exenteration       781

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Bleeding                                   Continue oxytocin infusion. Significant hemor-
                                                                                          rhage should be evaluated by surgeons for possible
                                                                                          perforation, laceration, or atony.
                                               PONV                                       Consider PONV prophylaxis with ondanestron 4 mg.
                                               HTN                                        BP should be monitored closely in preeclamptics.
                                                                                          Consider ICU admission if unstable.
                                               ↓ BP                                       Consider trophoblastic embolization and manage
                                                                                          aggressively.
                                               Peroneal nerve injury (2° to lithot-       Nerve injury manifested as foot drop and loss of
                                               omy position)                              sensation over dorsum of foot.

                    Pain                       Oral analgesics                            Acetaminophen (325–650 mg po). Vicodin, or
                      management                                                          ketorolac (15–30 mg iv) for pain control.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP: Gestational Trophoblastic Disease. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 15th edition.
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Philadelphia: 2001, 1458–78.
                     2. Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP: Molar pregnancy and gestational trophoblastic disease. In: Barakat RR, Perelman RO, Markman
                        M, Randal M, eds. Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia:
                        2009, 875–96.
                     3. Hoffman BL, Word LE: Surgeries for benign gynecologic conditions. In: Hoffman BL, Schorge Cunningham G, Calver LE,
                        eds. Williams Gynecology, 2nd edition. McGraw-Hill Co., Columbus: 2012.

                                                                                                                                                              Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                   PELVIC EXENTERATION
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Pelvic exenteration was introduced by Brunschwig as an ultraradical surgical approach for ad-
                   vanced and radioresistant cervical cancer. Although advanced vaginal and vulvar carcinoma occasionally
                   have been treated with this procedure, its most important role is in the management of centrally recurrent,
                   surgically resectable, radioresistant cervical carcinoma. Total pelvic exenteration involves en bloc resec-
                   tion of all pelvic tissues, including uterus, cervix, vagina, bladder, and rectum. Involvement of the distal vagi-
                   na may require resection of vulva and groin nodes. The goal of this procedure is curative with removal of all
                   cancer tissue and reconstruction of appropriate diversions for the urine and stool, if the colon cannot be
                   reanastomosed to the rectum. It is rare for cervical and vaginal cancer to involve the lower 5 cm of the rec-
                   tum and anus. It is, therefore, often possible to mobilize the descending colon and anastomose it primar-
                   ily to the distal rectum. Otherwise, an end colostomy is created. A continent or incontinent urinary diver-
                   sion, omental pelvic carpet or sling, and gracilis myocutaneous flaps for vaginal and perineal reconstruc-
                   tion are performed. A rectus abdominis muscle flap also can be used for vaginal reconstruction. This type
                   of flap yields excellent aesthetic and functional results. In cases where an omental sling (shown in Fig. 8.1-7)
                   cannot be developed, an absorbable synthetic mesh is sutured to the pelvic peritoneum to create a pelvic lid (like
                   a hammock) to keep the small bowel off the denuded pelvic peritoneum, thus decreasing the possibility of small-
                   bowel obstruction. In general, an additional 2–3 h of surgical time and an additional 300 mL of EBL are expected
                   when a vaginal reconstruction is undertaken. An exploratory laparotomy is needed prior to initiation of the ex-
                   enterative procedure to exclude spread of disease outside the pelvis and/or extension to pelvic sidewalls and pelvic
                   lymph nodes, all of which are absolute contraindications to this procedure.

===== PAGE 782 =====
782   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                             Figure 8.1-7. Sagittal section of the pelvis after a total pelvic exenteration. Note that
                                             all the reproductive organs, along with their supporting structures, the rectum and the
                                             bladder, have been resected. Drains can be placed through separate stab incisions in
                                             the abdomen. The small bowel is kept away from the operative site by a pelvic lid. The
                                             urinary and fecal diversions are not diagrammed. (Reproduced with permission from
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                             Wheeless CR: Atlas of Pelvic Surgery. Lea & Febiger: 1988.)
            Surgery

                                   Resectability is evaluated by examination of pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes, liver, hemidiaphragms, and peri-
                                   toneal surfaces of the upper abdomen and pelvic wall. Washings are obtained for cytology. Evaluation of lymph
                                   nodes is then performed and all suspicious nodes are submitted for frozen-section pathologic examination.
                                   The pararectal, paravesical, and presacral spaces are then developed. If the patient is found to be inoperable,
                                   Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) can be used to decrease the tumor burden. Consideration also
                                   should be given to intra-operative radiation therapy, which may provide an adjunctive treatment to radical sur-
                                   gery in the setting of: (1) recurrent disease close to the pelvic sidewalls; and (2) microscopically positive surgical
                                   margins or “close” resection margins. If the patient is deemed operable, the space of Retzius is developed. The
                                   round ligaments are then transected close to the pelvic sidewall bilaterally, and the infundibulopelvic ligaments
                                   also are ligated and transected. The ureters are divided as close to the bladder as possible. The superior hemor-
                                   rhoidal vessel is ligated and transected, and the colon is transected at the appropriate level. The anterior divisions
                                   of the internal iliac artery on both sides are ligated and divided, and the web of tissue is clamped close to the
                                   pelvic sidewall, transected, and suture-ligated. Following this, sharp dissection can be done to free up the speci-
                                   men from the low attachments to the levator muscles. In larger tumors, the levator muscle is partially removed
                                   with the specimen to provide adequate margins. From a combined perineal and abdominal approach, the distal
                                   vagina, urethra, and perineum (± rectum) can be resected. The specimen is handed off the field, hemostasis is
                                   achieved, and the bladder is reconstructed with a continent urinary diversion using an ileocolonic segment, ileal
                                   loop, or transverse colon conduit. An ileal loop or other urinary conduit is performed, a colostomy or low rectal
                                   anastomosis is done, vaginal reconstruction is undertaken, and the pelvic floor is covered. (Figs. 8.1-7 and 8.1-8
                                   show the completed exenteration.)
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Anterior pelvic exenteration is technically similar to a total pelvic exen-
                                   teration, except the rectum is left intact. Posterior pelvic exenteration involves preservation of bladder. Posterior
                                   exenteration has proved more useful in cancer of vulva or vagina than in cervical cancer. Anterior and posterior
                                   exenterations are used in selective cases because of the increased risk of an incomplete tumor resection and multiple
                                   complications and malfunctioning of the preserved organ.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Recurrent cervical carcinoma following radiotherapy

===== PAGE 783 =====
Pelvic Exenteration    783

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position            Modified dorsolithotomy with Allen stirrups

                     Incision            Midline longitudinal, perineal

                     Special             Vital View, ABC may be helpful; EEA, GIA, TA staplers; Robo-retractor or similar devices
                       instrumentation

                     Unique              NG tube placement intraop. VTE prevention with preop SCDs and prophylactic heparin. Preop
                       considerations    PFTs. Consider preop Greenfield IVC filter placement to avoid PE for high-risk patients. Consider
                                         intraop radiation of tumor bed and/or of resection margins. Abort case for positive lymph nodes,
                                         extrapelvic metastases and/or tumor extension to pelvic sidewalls noted.

                     Antibiotics         Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv preop and continue q 12 h for 3 days. Alternatively, ertapenum
                                         1 mg iv, or a combination of ampicillin (1 g), gentamicin (80 mg), and metronidazole (500 mg) may
                                         be given.

                     Surgical time       8–12 h (2-team approach); 5–10 h (for anterior and posterior exenteration)

                     Closing             Abdominal drains; colostomy; ureteral stents; urostomy; intraop radiation therapy. Triple-lumen
                       considerations    central line placement. Copious irrigation of the operative sites.

                     EBL                 1200–4000 mL

                     Postop care         ICU: 2–3 d. Correction of electrolyte imbalance. Extensive peritoneal raw surfaces → intraperito-
                                         neal fluid 3rd-spacing. Patients require good hydration to maintain intravascular volume. SCDs and
                                         heparin VTE prophylaxis. Early and aggressive use of TPN is important. Remove ureteral stents
                                         1–2 wk postop, when the edema at the ureterointestinal site has subsided.

                     Mortality           < 5%

                                                                                                                                                     Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Morbidity           Intraop hemorrhage requiring a median of 5 U PRBC

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                                         Infectious:
                                             Wound breakdown: 20–30%
                                             Nonspecific: 25%
                                             Flap necrosis: 1–15%
                                             Pelvic abscess: 9–17%
                                             Pyelonephritis: 14–27%
                                             Wound infection: 35%
                                             Sepsis: 5–27%
                                         Psychiatric: Confusion: 24%
                                         Intestinal:
                                             Ileus: 2–20%
                                             GI fistula: 10–32%
                                             Stoma breakdown: 3%
                                             Small bowel obstruction: 4–9%
                                         Renal:
                                             Ureteral stricture: 8%
                                             Ureteral fistulae: 4–8%
                                             Failure: 1–5%
                                         Cardiovascular:
                                             Venous thrombosis: 7–11%
                                             DIC: 3%
                                             Dysrrhythmia: 3%
                                             MI: 3%
                                         Pulmonary:
                                             Pneumonia: 9%
                                             PE: 2%
                                         Neurologic:
                                             CVA: 2%

                     Pain score          7–8

===== PAGE 784 =====
784   CHAPTER 8.1         Gynecologic Oncology

                                            Figure 8.1-8. Conceptual drawing shows the urinary and fecal diversions after a total
                                            pelvic exenteration. (Reproduced with permission from Wheeless CR: Atlas of Pelvic
                                            Surgery. Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              All age groups

                                    Incidence              1.5–17% of cervical cancers treated with radiation therapy (depending on stage and cell type)

                                    Associated             Advanced or recurrent gynecologic malignancies; radiation injury
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   This procedure is performed for recurrent rectal, cervical, or other gynecologic cancers and involves removal of
                                   all pelvic organs. Occasionally, the bladder or rectum is preserved, if not involved with tumor. Most patients have
                                   undergone preop radiation or chemotherapy.

                                   Respiratory              Usually not significant unless there is Hx of smoking or lung disease. Consider prior che-
                                                            motherapy. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Second-Look/Reassessment Laparotomy
                                                            for Ovarian Cancer, p. 765.)
                                                            Tests: Consider CXR; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Cardiovascular           Exercise tolerance should be assessed. Underlying CAD or CHF should be medically opti-
                                                            mized preoperatively. Any exposure to cardiotoxic chemotherapy should be investigated;
                                                            consider ECHO.
                                                            Tests: Consider ECG; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Neurological             Any Hx of stroke, Sz, carotid artery disease, or other neurologic disease should be evalu-
                                                            ated and documented.

===== PAGE 785 =====
Pelvic Exenteration      785

                    Endocrine             Any endocrine disease, such as diabetes, should be optimized in consultation with the
                                          patient’s primary care physician or endocrinologist. Ask about recent corticosteroid use.
                                          Tests: Fasting blood sugar in the diabetic; others as indicated from H&P

                    Gastrointestinal      Consider ascites and malnutrition.

                    Hematologic           Many patients will be anemic from chronic disease and malnutrition. Consider T&S/T&C.
                                          Tests: CBC, PT, PTT

                    Laboratory            Additional testing as indicated from preop H&P.

                    Premedication         Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv. Detailed explanation about the procedure and the poten-
                                          tial for postop events including intubation and mechanical ventilation are worthwhile.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± supplemental epidural anesthesia.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction             Standard induction (p. B-2), unless otherwise indicated by patient condition. Keep in mind
                                          possibility surgery could be significantly shortened if patient deemed inoperable during
                                          initial exploration.

                    Maintenance           Balanced anesthetic technique based on comorbidities, use of concomitant epidural anes-
                                          thesia and likelihood of needing ICU postop. Epidural anesthetic and narcotic (morphine
                                          or hydromorphone) can be given to reduce anesthetic requirements.

                                                                                                                                                 Obstetric/Gynecologic
                    Emergence             If patient is hemodynamically stable, with favorable oxygenation and pulmonary function,
                                          normothermic, and responsive at the end of surgery, extubation may be appropriate. Any

                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                                          patient who is unstable, hypothermic, has high-oxygen requirements, significant edema of
                                          the face or airway, is acidotic, or who has ongoing fluid requirements should be admitted to
                                          ICU and remain intubated. Due to the large fluid shifts and significant complication rates,
                                          postop monitoring in the ICU is appropriate.

                    Epidural              Consider epidural for intraop and/or postop use: 2% lidocaine (10–15 mL), or 0.25%
                                          bupivacaine (10–20 mL), with or without hydromorphone (0.3–0.8 mg), may be given in
                                          the epidural for postop pain control. Intraop use may ↑ hemodynamic instability in setting
                                          of ↑ bleeding and fluid shifts.

                    Ventilation           5–7 cm H2O PEEP may help pre- 3ABGs during surgery. Adjust ventilation to keep
                                          vent atelectasis.             normocarbic. Correct the underlying cause of any
                                                                        metabolic acidosis.

                    Blood and fluid       Potential large blood loss           Renal ultrafiltration improved by NS/LR, bowel edema
                       requirements       IV: 14–16 ga × 2                     ↑’d. LR useful when acidosis occurs. NS is better when
                                          NS/LR at 10–15 mL/kg/h               giving blood products or when metabolic alkalosis is
                                          Colloid solutions                    present. Rapid-infuser should be available. Strive to
                                                                               maintain euvolemia based on BP, HR, UO, ABG, inva-
                                                                               sive monitoring (CVP, CO, art line tracing), and esti-
                                                                               mates of ongoing EBL and fluid shifts.
                                          Hetastarch                           Use of 6% hetastarch should be limited to 1000 mL
                                          Consider PRBCs when Hct < 27%        due to potential coagulopathy with larger volumes.
                                          Maintain UO of 0.5–1 mL/kg/h.
                                          Ionized Ca++                         Measure ionized Ca++ and K+ after rapid administra-
                                                                               tion of blood products; replace Ca++ as necessary.
                                          FFP/Plt                              Plt or FFP for coagulation abnormalities. Monitor values
                                                                               at regular intervals based on PT stability and events.

===== PAGE 786 =====
786   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                   Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1).           Invasive hemodynamic monitoring with arterial and
                                                              ± Arterial line                           CVP catheters usually helpful in these cases which
                                                              ± CVP                                     are of very long, and associated with major bleeding,
                                                              Foley catheter                            fluid shifts, ICU postop, and potential need for vaso-
                                                                                                        active infusions.
                                                              ± TEE                                     TEE allows intraop assessment of myocardial func-
                                                                                                        tion and may be appropriate in selected patients.

                                   Positioning                3 and pad pressure points                 * NB: peroneal nerve compression at lateral fibular
                                                              3 eyes                                    head → foot drop.
                                                              Antiembolism stockings and SCD

                                   Complications              Hypothermia                               Use forced air and fluid warmers and monitor
                                                                                                        temperature.
                                                              VTE                                       See Appendix B
                                                              Coagulopathy
                                                              Trauma to kidney                          Watch for hematuria or ↓ UO
                                                              ± Ureters
                                                              Bleeding                                  Monitor hemoglobin and coagulation status peri-
                                                              Metabolic acidosis                        odically during long surgery. Keep adequate reserve
                                                                                                        blood products available.
                                                              Peripheral nerve injury                   Prolonged surgery: carefully pad, secure, and moni-
                                                                                                        tor all extremities.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Complications              Bleeding                                    3Hct and coags periodically. Be prepared for con-
                                                                                                          tinued increased fluid requirements for 24 h postop.
            Surgery

                                                              Fluid overload                              Maintain euvolemia, if significant fluid gain occurs,
                                                              Hypothermia                                 consider ICU postop ventilation.
                                                              PONV                                        If extubated. See p. B-6.
                                                              VTE                                         See p. B-8.
                                                              Peripheral nerve injury                     For prolonged surgery, carefully pad, secure, and
                                                                                                          monitor all extremities.

                                   Pain                       Epidural or iv opiates                      See p. C-2.
                                     management

                                   Tests                      CBC, chemistry panel, coags, ABG            Others as indicated from postoperative course.
                                                                                                          Patient will likely need ongoing critical care/ICU
                                                                                                          management.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                    1. Benn T, Brooks RA, Zhang Q, et al: Pelvic exenteration in gynecologic oncology: a single institution study over 20 years.
                                       Gynecologic Oncology 2001; 122:14–8.
                                    2. Berek S, Howe C, Lagasse LD, et al: Pelvic exenteration for recurrent gynecologic malignancy: survival and morbidity analysis
                                       of the 45-year experience at UCLA. Gynecologic Oncology 2005; 99:153–9.
                                    3. Burke TW, Morley GW: Pelvic exenteration. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. Te Linde’s Operative Gynecology, 9th edition.
                                       Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003, 1523–36.
                                    4. Husain A, Curtin J, Brown C, et al: Continent urinary diversion and low-rectal anastomosis in patients undergoing exenterative
                                       procedures for recurrent gynecologic malignancies. Gynecol Oncol 2000; 78:208–11.
                                    5. Maggioni A, Raviglione G, Landoni F, et al: Pelvic exenteration: ten-year experience at the European Institute of Oncology in
                                       Milan. Gynecologic Oncology 2009; 114:64–8.
                                    6. Randall ME, Michael H, Long H, et al: Uterine cervix. In: Barakat RR, Perlman OR, Markman M, Randal M, eds. Principles
                                       and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009, 623–82.

===== PAGE 787 =====
Exploratory Laparotomy or Laparoscopy, Hysterectomy/Bso for Uterine Cancer                   787

                   EXPLORATORY LAPAROTOMY OR LAPAROSCOPY,
                   HYSTERECTOMY/BSO FOR UTERINE CANCER
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATION
                   Description: Currently, endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in the United States.
                   The first step in the management of this cancer is surgical staging via laparotomy or laparoscopy. The objective,
                   aside from 1° therapy, is to obtain as much surgical and pathological staging data as feasible for determination
                   of adjuvant postop therapy. Traditionally, surgery for uterine cancer was performed via laparotomy; however,
                   laparoscopy has become a preferred approach for early stage uterine cancer after recent trials have shown de-
                   creased operative morbidity and similar survival outcomes compared to laparotomy. In laparoscopy, or an open-
                   approach, the first step is careful exploration, which is carried out for evidence of omental, liver, peritoneal, and
                   adnexal metastases. Aortic and pelvic areas are evaluated for metastases, and suspicious nodes are removed. In
                   patients with low-grade histology and no or minimal suspected invasion, complete lymph node dissection remains
                   an area of controversy, and treatment is generally individualized based on clinicopathologic factors. In patients with
                   more extensive disease, a pelvic and periaortic lymph nodes dissection is performed. The lymph node sampling may
                   be omitted in the treatment of some uterine sarcomas. A total hysterectomy with BSO is then performed in the
                   usual manner (see discussion of TAH/BSO in Staging Laparotomy for Ovarian Cancer, p. 760).
                   As a result of recent clinical trials, minimally invasive surgery via laparoscopy or robotic-assisted laparoscopy has
                   become the first approach for uterine cancer staging. The GOG conducted a randomized prospective study evaluat-
                   ing exploratory laparotomy with open staging versus laparoscopic staging (GOG LAP2) to compare outcomes and
                   safety. In 2009, the GOG published the data regarding perioperative morbidity and showed that the laparoscopic
                   approach was associated with a shorter hospital stay and fewer moderate-to-severe postoperative complications. In

                                                                                                                                                         Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   2012, the GOG published the survival data, which did not show statistical equivalence between two approaches rela-
                   tive to survival; however, a recent Cochrane meta-analysis has shown equivalent recurrence free and overall survival

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                   with laparoscopy compared to laparotomy. When proceeding with a laparoscopic approach, it is important to note
                   that adhesions of variable severity may be present from prior surgery or radiation. Care should be taken to avoid
                   possible bowel injury at time of trocar insertion. Patient needs to be in steep Trendelenburg position for duration
                   of the procedure, and both arms should be tucked in at the patient’s sides. Because argon is a heavy gas, prolonged
                   use of the endoscopic ABC in a patient in steep Trendelenburg can → significant facial and neck subcutaneous em-
                   physema. As with the open technique, the lymph nodes being removed are in the immediate proximity of the great
                   pelvic vessels. The surgeon and anesthesiologist should be mindful of the potential for severe hemorrhage if these
                   vessels are injured.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Endometrial carcinoma

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                            Open Technique                                    Laparoscopic and Robotic Technique

                     Position               Supine                                            Modified dorsolithotomy in Allen stirrups

                     Incision               Midline longitudinal abdominal/transverse         Vertical infraumbilical and multiple small trans-
                                                                                              verse incisions. For robotic surgery, midline
                                                                                              incision is supraumbilical.

                     Special                None                                              Uterine manipulator, Videolaparoscopy equip-
                       instrumentation                                                        ment. Endoscopic GIA staplers, endoscopic
                                                                                              ABC, endoscopic vascular clips, and CO2
                                                                                              laser. For robotic surgery, bean bag posi-
                                                                                              tioner, additional padding for shoulders, neck,
                                                                                              and arms.

                     Unique                 None                                              Mechanical bowel preop; steep Trendelenburg
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv; additional   ⇐
                                            doses based on EBL and duration of surgery.

===== PAGE 788 =====
788   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                    Surgical time           2–4 h                                             2–3 h

                                    Closing                 ± NG tube placement                               Release the pneumoperitoneum completely.
                                      considerations                                                          Closure of fascia at trocar sites ≥ 10 mm
                                                                                                              diameter

                                    EBL                     400–750 mL                                        100–500 mL

                                    Postop care             Consider using SCDs and heparin for DVT           Begin early ambulation and feeding. Patients
                                                            prophylaxis.                                      generally can be discharged on POD 1 or 2.

                                                            Open Technique                                    Laparoscopic Technique

                                    Mortality               0.1%                                              ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Hemorrhage requiring transfusion: 15%             4–7%
                                                            Thrombophlebitis: 7%                              ⇐
                                                            UTI: 7%                                           ⇐
                                                            Paralytic ileus: 2–5%                             1–2%
                                                            Wound infection: 3–7%                             Rare
                                                            VTE: 1–3%                                         ⇐
                                                            Pelvic infection: 1–2%                            ⇐
                                                            Wound dehiscence: 1%                              N/A
                                                            Bowel injuries: < 1%                              1%
                                                            Urinary tract injuries: < 1%                      1–5%
                                                                                                              Trocar site herniation: 0.5–2%
                                                                                                              Trocar site tumor: <1%
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Pain score              7                                                 2–3
            Surgery

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Reproductive and postreproductive ages (average = 61 yr)

                                    Incidence               24/100,000; 47,130 new cases in 2012, lifetime risk 2.6%

                                    Etiology                Exposure to unopposed endogenous or exogenous estrogen; ↑ extraglandular conversion of
                                                            androstenedione to estrone; sequential oral contraceptive pills; exposure to radiation (sarcomas)

                                    Risk factors            Nulliparity, late menopause, early menarche, family hx, chronic anovulation, PCOS, tamoxifen use

                                    Associated              Obesity; diabetes; HTN; nulliparity; late menopause; early menarche; family Hx; Stein-Leventhal
                                      conditions            syndrome; chronic anovulation; ovarian and colon cancer; granulosa cell ovarian tumors; arthri-
                                                            tis; hypothyroidism; HNPCC (Lynch) syndrome

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   Endometrial cancer usually is diagnosed in postmenopausal women who present with vaginal bleeding. Exploratory
                                   laparotomy or laparoscopy and TAH/BSO are commonly performed for removal of the primary tumor as well as stag-
                                   ing of metastatic disease. Occasionally, preop radiation therapy may be in progress, with consequent systemic effects.

                                   Respiratory               3for Hx of lung disease or smoking.
                                                             Tests: Others as indicated from H&P

                                   Cardiovascular            Hx of CAD, HTN, or CHF Sx (e.g., angina, dyspnea, or peripheral edema) should be inves-
                                                             tigated. Assess patient’s exercise tolerance and current medications. Tests such as an exer-
                                                             cise treadmill or ECHO may be indicated if patient has significant angina or CHF.
                                                             Tests: Patients > 60 yr should have a preop ECG.

===== PAGE 789 =====
Exploratory Laparotomy or Laparoscopy, Hysterectomy/Bso for Uterine Cancer              789

                    Neurological           Look for cerebrovascular disease, Sz, or other neurologic disease.

                    Endocrine              Inquire about the presence of endocrine diseases, such as diabetes and hypothyroidism,
                                           which have been associated with this tumor. If the patient has received corticosteroids
                                           within the previous 6 mo, a supplemental dose of hydrocortisone (100 mg iv q 12 h × 2 d)
                                           should be considered.
                                           Tests: Consider tests if indicated from H&P.

                    Neuromuscular          Osteoarthritis and osteoporosis common in this patient population. Ask about NSAID usage.

                    Hematologic            If vaginal bleeding has been profuse or of long duration, significant anemia may occur.
                                           Consider preop iron supplements if there are several days until surgery.
                                           Tests: CBC

                    Laboratory             Additional testing based on preop H&P.

                    Premedication          Consider anxiolytic, such as midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural or spinal analgesia/anesthesia.
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction              Standard induction (p. B-2)

                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                                           Reverse muscle relaxant with neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg with glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg).

                                                                                                                                               Obstetric/Gynecologic
                    Emergence
                                           Provide supplemental O2 until patient is fully recovered from anesthesia. Consider PONV
                                           prophylaxis (e.g., ondansetron 4 mg iv).

                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Epidural               2% lidocaine (10–20 mL), ± epinephrine 1:200,000, or 0.25% bupivacaine (15–20 mL) is
                                           used; then at ~3–5 mL/h. Narcotics, such as morphine (2–4 mg) or hydromorphone (0.3–
                                           0.6 mg), may be given in the epidural for postop pain control.

                    Blood and fluid        IV: 16–18 ga × 1                       Crystalloid is used for volume replacement. If ane-
                       requirements        NS/LR at 4–6 mL/kg/h                   mia is present preop, it may be necessary to give
                                           Consider PRBC for Hct < 25%            PRBCs to keep Hct > 25%.

                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (p. B-1)             Direct monitoring of arterial pressure is indicated
                                           Foley catheter                         in patients with CAD, severe HTN, or lung disease.
                                           ± Arterial line, CVP                   Consider art line and/or CVP if significant comor-
                                           ± NG tube                              bidities exist.

                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points
                                           3 eyes
                                           Antiembolism stockings and SCD

                    Complications          Hypothermia                            Warm iv fluids; use forced-air warmer. Heating pad
                                                                                  on OR table.
                                           Trauma or obstruction of ureter        Watch for hematuria or ↓ UO

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications          PONV                                   See p. B-6.
                                           VTE                                    See p. B-8.
                                           Hypothermia
                                           Bleeding

===== PAGE 790 =====
790   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                   Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                               Ketorolac (30 mg im/iv) is useful for breakthrough
                                     management               Epidural/spinal narcotics (p. C-2)         pain. A multimodal approach—including local
                                                                                                         anesthetics, NSAIDs, and acetaminophen, or even
                                                                                                         low-dose (0.1–0.2 mg/kg/h) ketamine—in the OR
                                                                                                         may provide analgesia and ↓ PONV.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Coronoado PJ, Herrai MA, Magrina JF, et al: Comparison of perioperative outcomes and cost of robotic-assisted laparoscopy,
                                        laparoscopy, and laparotomy for endometrial cancer. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Repro Biol 2012; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
                                        j.ejogrb.2012.07.006
                                     2. Galaal K, Bryant A, Fisher AD, et al: Laparoscopy versus laparotomy for the management of early stage endometrial cancer.
                                        Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; Issue 9.
                                     3. Sutton G, Kavanagh J, Wolfson A, et al: Corpus: Epithelial tumors. In: Barakat RR, Perlman RO, Markman M, Randal M, eds.
                                        Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009, 683–732.
                                     4. Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al: Recurrance and survival after random assignment to laparoscopy versus
                                        laparostomy for comprehensive surgical staging of uterine cancer: a Gynecologic Group LAP2 study. Journal of Clinical
                                        Oncology 2012; 30:695–700.
                                     5. Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al: Laparoscopy compared with laparotomy for comprehensive surgical staging of
                                        uterine cancer: Gynecologic Oncology Group Study LAP2. J Clin Oncology 2009; 32:5331–6.

                                   RADICAL HYSTERECTOMY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                   Description: Radical hysterectomy is the preferred mode of therapy for young women with Stage IA, IB, or non-
                                   bulky IIA cervical carcinoma, who want to preserve ovarian function. It is also appropriate with Stage II endometrial
                                   and Stage I vaginal carcinoma. The operation involves the removal of the uterus, along with the upper vagina and all
                                   the parametrial tissues to the pelvic sidewall. A pelvic and paraaortic lymph node dissection usually is performed at
                                   the beginning of the procedure. Suspicious nodes are submitted for pathological frozen-section evaluation. The para-
                                   vesical and pararectal spaces are then developed, with the “web” of tissue between these two spaces being palpated
                                   carefully (Fig. 8.1-9). In cases of cervical or vaginal cancer, if parametrial tumor extension is noted and/or the lymph
                                   nodes are positive on frozen section, the hysterectomy may be aborted. The radical hysterectomy is performed after
                                   the pararectal and paravesical spaces have been developed. The uterine arteries are divided at their origin from the
                                   anterior division of the internal iliac artery. The ureters are dissected free of the parametrial tissues, which are then
                                   transected close to the pelvic sidewall. Next, the rectovaginal space is developed (Fig. 8.1-10). The uterosacral liga-
                                   ments are transected between their uterine and sacral attachments. The upper third of the vagina is cross-clamped
                                   and divided in such a manner as to provide a 3-cm margin, and the specimen is delivered en bloc. Note that during
                                   this procedure the ureters and bladder are dissected free and left intact. With the increasing use of minimally inva-
                                   sive surgery in gynecologic oncology, radical hysterectomy is frequently performed laparoscopically or robotically.
                                   Similar to laparoscopic surgery for endometrial cancer, steep Trendelenburg is required during the procedure, and
                                   special care is taken to support the head, shoulders, and arms (see p. 787).
                                   In reproductive-age women, who may require postop radiotherapy, ovarian function is preserved by performing an
                                   oophoropexy. This is accomplished by severing the uteroovarian ligament and mobilizing the ovarian vessels as they
                                   course through the infundibulopelvic ligament. The ovaries are then sutured outside the radiation therapy field and
                                   marked with metal clips for future identification.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Stallworthy, Dolstad, Novak, Rutledge, Wertheim, and other surgeons have
                                   proposed several modifications in an effort to reduce the incidence of ureteral and bladder fistulae. These approaches
                                   include preservation of blood supply to the terminal 2 cm of the pelvic ureter by widely displacing ureters (not dis-
                                   secting them from their fascial beds) and limiting parametrial dissection to the proximal 1/3 or 1/2.

===== PAGE 791 =====
Radical Hysterectomy        791

                   Usual preop diagnosis: Stage IA, IB, or nonbulky IIA cervical carcinoma; Stage II endometrial or Stage I vaginal
                   carcinoma (less common)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs
                                                                                                   Laparoscopy or Robotic-Assisted
                                          Laparotomy                                               Laparoscopy

                     Position             Supine/modified lithotomy                                Modified dorsal lithotomy

                     Incision             Midline longitudinal or low transverse abdominal         Supra- or infraumbilical midline incision
                                          (Maylard/Cherney)                                        and multiple small transverse incisions

                     Special              ABC, Vital View (suction, irrigation, and light source
                       instrumentation    combined in 1 instrument) helpful

                     Unique               Abort case if positive paraaortic lymph nodes found on   ⇐ + mechanical bowel prep, steep
                       considerations     frozen section, or if obvious parametrial involvement    Trendelenburg
                                          noted. Consider intraop radiation therapy (investiga-
                                          tional), if patient is inoperable.

                     Antibiotics          Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv; then q 12 h × 2     ⇐
                                          doses; additional doses based on EBL and duration of
                                          surgery.

                     Surgical time        3–6 h                                                    2–4 h

                     Closing              Vaginal and abdominal drains; ± NG tube placement;       Release the pneumoperitoneum com-
                       considerations     suprapubic bladder catheter placement; oophoropexy;      pletely. Closure of fascia at trocar
                                          copious irrigation                                       sites > 10 mm diameter

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     EBL                  500–1500 mL                                              100–500 mL

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                     Postop care          Transient ileus very common. Advance diet slowly.        Early ambulation and feeding. Patients
                                          Transient bladder dysfunction very common; there-        can be discharged POD#1 or 2. Transient
                                          fore, continued bladder drainage for 1+ wk may be        bladder dysfunction common; urinary
                                          necessary. Consider using SCDs and heparin for DVT       catheter kept in place 5–7 d. Consider
                                          prophylaxis.                                             preoperative prophylactic heparin

                     Mortality            0.3–2.0%                                                 0.1–0.2%

                     Morbidity            Paralytic ileus: 3–11%                                   Ileus: 1–2%
                                          Pelvic lymphocyst: 2–3%                                  Lymphocyst: 2–6%
                                          Intraop hemorrhage: 3–5%                                 Intraop hemorrhage: 1–3%
                                          Thrombophlebitis: 7%                                     Thrombophlebitis: 7%
                                          Pneumonia: 1.5–4%                                        Pneumonia: 1.5–4%
                                          Wound infection: 3.5%                                    Wound infection: Rare
                                          Vesical injury: 2–3%                                     Vesical injury: 2–3%
                                          Pelvic infection: 1–2%                                   Ureteral injury: 1–3%
                                          PE: 1–2%                                                 Pelvic infection: 1–2%
                                          Vesical fistulae: 1–2%                                   PE: 1–3%
                                          Small bowel obstruction: 1–2%                            Small bowel obstruction: Rare
                                          Ureteral fistulae: 1–2%                                  Wound dehiscence: Rare
                                          Uretral injury: 1–2%                                     Postop lymphedema: Rare
                                          Wound dehiscence: 1%                                     Conversion to laparotomy: 1–2%
                                          Postop lymphedema: <1%                                   Cuff dehiscence: 5–8%
                                          Rectal injury: <1%                                       Trocar site herniation: 0.5–2%
                                          Pelvic urinoma: Rare                                     Bladder dysfunction: 10–20%

                     Pain score           8                                                        5–6

===== PAGE 792 =====
792   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                               Figure 8.1-9. View of parametrial area, showing positions of ureter and uterine artery
                                               to web, hypergastric vessels, paravesical, and pararectal spaces. (Reproduced with
                                               permission from Wheeless CR: Atlas of Pelvic Surgery. Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                               Figure 8.1-10. Schematic diagram of a cut in the anteroposterior plane with positions
                                               of all spaces in relation to pelvic organs. (Reproduced with permission from Wheeless
                                               CR: Atlas of Pelvic Surgery. Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Reproductive and postreproductive years

                                    Incidence               10/100,000

                                    Etiology                Human papilloma virus (HPV), subtypes 16, 18 (most common), and others

                                    Associated              Smoking; venereal warts; genital herpes; multiple sexual partners; early-age onset of coitus;
                                      conditions            multiparity; lower socioeconomic status; HIV infection

===== PAGE 793 =====
Radical Hysterectomy   793

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   This surgery usually is performed for cervical carcinoma in young women who wish to preserve ovarian function,
                   and whose tumor has not spread beyond local invasion. Lymph nodes are removed to confer a therapeutic advantage
                   and to plan postop adjuvant therapy, if any.

                    Respiratory            These tumors have been associated with cigarette smoking. 3 for preexisting lung disease.
                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular         Patients > 60 yr need a preop ECG.
                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic            3 NSAID usage in the previous week.
                                           Tests: Hemogram

                    Laboratory             Renal panel if age ≥ 65 yr, HTN, renal disease, DM

                    Premedication          Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA ± epidural or spinal analgesia for postop pain control.

                                                                                                                                              Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                      Laparotomy                            Laparoscopy

                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                    Induction              Standard induction
                                           (p. B-2)

                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance
                                           (p. B-3)

                    Emergence              No special
                                           considerations

                    Blood and fluid        500–1500 mL                Maintain euvolemia based on           100–500 mL iv 16–18 ga
                       requirements        IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2         HR, BP, UO, invasive monitoring,      x1-2 NS/LR at 6 mL/kg/h
                                           NS/LR at 6–8 mL/kg/h       ABG, and estimates of ongoing
                                           Maintain UO > 0.5 mL/      blood loss and fluid shifts.
                                           kg/h
                                           Warm iv fluids

                    Monitoring             Standard monitors          Consider invasive monitoring for      ⇐
                                           (p. B-1)                   patients with underlying cardio-
                                           Foley catheter             pulmonary disease, advanced age,
                                           ± Arterial catheter        or in cases of large anticipated or
                                           ± CVP catheter             unanticipated blood loss.

                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure                                               Steep Trendelenburg
                                           points
                                           3 eyes
                                           Antiembolism stockings
                                           and SCD

                    Complications          Injury to ureters          Watch for hematuria or ↓ UO.          ⇐
                                           Hypothermia                Warm iv fluids; use forced-air
                                                                      warmer.

===== PAGE 794 =====
794   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications              Atelectasis                            Give supplemental O2 postop. Encourage use of incen-
                                                              Hypothermia                            tive spirometer.
                                                              Bleeding
                                                              VTE                                    See p. B-6
                                                              PONV                                   See p. B-8

                                   Pain                       PCA (p. C-3)                           Consider ketorolac 15–30 mg im/iv q 8 h for break-
                                     management               Epidural or spinal narcotics           through pain.
                                                              (p. C-2)

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Randall ME, Michael H, Long H, et al: Uterine cervix. In: Barakat RR, Perlman RO, Markman M, et al, eds. Principles and
                                        Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 5th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2009, 623–82.
                                     2. Wright JD, Herzog TJ, Neugut AI, et al: Comparative effectiveness of minimally invasive radical hysterectomy for cervical
                                        cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2012; 127:11–17.

                                   ROBOTIC-ASSISTED LAPAROSCOPY and SURGERY IN
                                   GYNECOLOGIC ONCOLOGY
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Laparoscopy and robotic-assisted laparoscopy are both widely used to treat gynecologic cancers. As
                                   reviewed previously, a recent Cochrane review has shown equivalent disease-free and overall survival when com-
                                   paring laparoscopy to an open approach for the treatment of endometrial cancer. In addition, other advantages of
                                   a laparoscopic approach include a shorter hospital stay, better pain control, faster recovery time, ↓ morbidity, and
                                   cosmetically appealing smaller incisions. Increasingly, more studies are being published to better answer questions
                                   regarding the safety of use in malignant diseases, differences in operative time, and cost, as well as survival and mor-
                                   bidity differences based on cancer type. The authors believe that there is a role for laparoscopy in select situations,
                                   such as:
                                       • Assessment of adnexal masses and diagnosis of ovarian cancer;
                                       • Laparoscopic lymphadenectomy with laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy or laparoscopic hyster-
                                          ectomy in staging of endometrial cancer;
                                       • Laparoscopically assisted radical vaginal hysterectomy or laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with lymphad-
                                          enectomy in early-stage cervical cancer;
                                       • Laparoscopically assisted application of interstitial brachytherapy implants; and
                                       • Interval or secondary cytoreductive surgery for ovarian cancer.
                                   Details of each of these procedures are beyond the scope of this section; however, common principles of laparo-
                                   scopic techniques (e.g., adhesiolysis, biopsies, oophorectomy, omentectomy) apply (see discussion in Laparoscopic
                                   Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery, p. 864). The patient is placed in the dorsal lithotomy position, with the buttocks
                                   extended over the edge of the table to allow for instrument manipulation, and may need to be placed in steep Tren-
                                   delenburg position during surgery. Various techniques are used for entry into the abdominal cavity, but the open
                                   laparoscopic technique is favored by many and may ↓ risk of vascular or visceral injuries. Other incision-related
                                   complications include dehiscence and hernia.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ovarian tumor and other gynecological cancers/tumors

===== PAGE 795 =====
Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopy and Surgery in Gynecologic Oncology                   795

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                 Dorsal lithotomy; legs in Allen universal stirrups; steep Trendelenburg

                     Incisions                Intraumbilical; bilateral suprapubic; midline suprapubic

                     Special                  CO2 laser; bipolar Ligasure or other device; suction irrigator; may require Harmonic Scalpel; vari-
                       instrumentation        ous laparoscopic stapling instruments; beanbag or other support for robotic surgery

                     Unique                   Extended operative time and period of abdominal insufflation for radical procedures. Possible
                       considerations         rapid need for laparotomy. Extensive use of electrocautery, ABC, CO2 laser

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time            1.5–5 h

                     Closing                  Quicker than with laparotomy; but fascia of all 10- to 12-mm ports need to be closed. 5-mm
                       considerations         trocar sites can be closed in a subcuticular fashion.

                     EBL                      50–1500 mL, depending on extent of procedure

                     Postop care              Advance diet as tolerated, ambulate POD#0, discharge POD#1-2

                     Mortality                0.1%

                     Morbidity                Overall complication rate: 0.2–10.3%
                                              Conversion to laparotomy: 2.1–7%
                                              Port-site metastasis: < 1%
                                              Subcutaneous emphysema: 0.3–2%
                                              Pneumomediastinum: 0.26%
                                              Brachial plexus neuropathy: 0.16%

                                                                                                                                                            Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                              Incisional hernia: 0.5–2%
                                              Bowel injury: 1%

                                                                                                                                                                   Surgery
                                              Major vascular injury: < 1%
                                              Bladder/ureteral injury: 1–3%
                                              Gas embolism: Rare
                                              Wound infection: Uncommon

                     Pain score               3–4

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Reproductive and postreproductive year

                     Incidence                Depends on primary disease

                     Etiology                 Numerous, depending on primary disease (see appropriate sections earlier in this chapter).

                     Associated               See specific procedures in this chapter.
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations for Laparoscopic Hysterectomy, p. 864.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Coronoado PJ, Herrai MA, Magrina JF, et al: Comparison of perioperative outcomes and cost of robotic-assisted laparoscopy,
                        laparoscopy, and laparotomy for endometrial cancer. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Repro Biol 2012; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
                        j.ejorgb.2012.07.006
                     2. Galaal K, Bryant A, Fisher AS, et al: Laparoscopy versus laparotomy for the management of early stage endometrial cancer.
                        Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; Issue 9.

===== PAGE 796 =====
796   CHAPTER 8.1           Gynecologic Oncology

                                     3. Husain A, Chi DS, Prasad M, et al: The role of laparoscopy in second-look evaluations for ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol
                                        2001; 80:44–7.
                                     4. Joshi GP: Complications of laparoscopy. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2001; 19:89–105.
                                     5. Magrina JF: Complications of laparoscopic surgery. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2002; 45:469–80.
                                     6. Ramirez PT, Frumovitz M, Escobar PF: Minimally invasive surgery. In: Karlan BY, Bristow RE, Li AJ, eds. Gynecologic
                                        Oncology: Clinical Practice and Surgical Atlas, 1st edition. McGraw-Hill, New York: 2012.
                                     7. Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al: Laparoscopy compared with laparotomy for comprehensive surgical staging of
                                        uterine cancer: Gynecologic Oncology Group Study LAP2. J Clin Oncol 2009; 32:5331–6.
                                     8. Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al: Recurrance and survival after random assignment to laparoscopy versus
                                        laparostomy for comprehensive surgical staging of uterine cancer: a Gynecologic Group LAP2 Study. J Clin Oncol 2012;
                                        30:695–700.
                                     9. Wright JD, Herzog TJ, Neugut AI, et al: Comparative effectiveness of minimally invasive and abdominal radical hysterectomy
                                        for cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2012; 127:11–7.

                                   INTERSTITIAL PERINEAL IMPLANTS
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
                                   (FIGO) Stage IIB-IVA carcinoma of the cervix; Stage I, II, III, and IVA vaginal cancers; selected vulvar cancers;
                                   and pelvic recurrences of gynecologic cancers. In addition, radiotherapy is also commonly used as an adjuvant
                                   treatment with chemotherapy and surgery for advanced endometrial cancer. Often, external-beam therapy is
                                   combined with brachytherapy, either in the form of intracavitary insertion or as an interstitial perineal template
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   implant. Intracavitary radiotherapy utilizes devices such as Fletcher-Suit tandem and ovoid applicators (Fig. 8.1-11)
                                   or cylinders that are fitted into the vagina and provide a therapeutic boost to the vaginal apex region after external
            Surgery

                                   beam irradiation. In general, these devices do not require a laparotomy or laparoscopy for guidance. For selected
                                   patients with distorted anatomy and/or bulky tumors, interstitial implants provide superior dose distribution and
                                   better local tumor control. The two most widely used systems are the Martinez Universal Perineal Interstitial
                                   Template (MUPIT) and the Syed-Neblett applicator. These systems have similar efficacy, and both are performed
                                   in the OR with the patient under MAC or GA. A laparoscopy or laparotomy is frequently performed at the time of
                                   interstitial implant placement to accurately guide the needles into their target tissues and to avoid radiation injury
                                   to bowel and/or other pelvic organs not involved with tumor. To minimize postop patient discomfort, some centers
                                   use laparoscopy instead of laparotomy for needle guidance. A two-team approach is used: a gynecologic oncology
                                   team performs the laparotomy or laparoscopy and guides the needles from above; a radiation oncology team inserts
                                   the implants from below. The implants are afterloaded with the appropriate radiation sources when the patient has
                                   returned to her shielded room. If a hysterectomy has been done previously, an omental pelvic carpet, or a pelvic
                                   lid made of delayed, absorbable mesh, is performed to provide additional space between the radiation source and
                                   bowel.
                                   One important and recent advance in radiation therapy is the technique, intensity-modulated radiation therapy
                                   (IMRT). IMRT is a form of external beam radiation and allows creation of a gradient of radiation dose over a speci-
                                   fied treatment area, in contrast to the previous method of delivering a constant dose to all tissues. As more IMRT
                                   is being used, fewer patients are needing an operative procedure to assist with delivery of the appropriate radiation
                                   dose.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cervical, vaginal, vulvar carcinomas; pelvic recurrence of gynecologic malignancies

===== PAGE 797 =====
Interstitial Perineal Implants     797

                                Figure 8.1-11. “Fletcher-Suit.” The tandem and ovoid applicators are packed into the vagina,
                                leaving the maximum distance between the bladder and radium sources. (Reproduced with
                                permission from Wheeless CR: Atlas of Pelvic Surgery. Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                              Laparotomy-Guided                                    Laparoscopy-Guided

                                                                                                                                                              Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Position                 Modified dorsolithotomy; Allen stirrups              ⇐

                                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                     Incision                 Midline longitudinal abdominal                       Vertical infraumbilical and multiple small trans-
                                                                                                   verse incisions at the pubic hairline

                     Special                  Syed-Neblett or MUPIT systems, or modifica-          ⇐ + videolaparoscopy equipment, preferably
                       instrumentation        tions thereof                                        with a 3-chip camera

                     Unique considera-        MRI and/or CT scans + information from physi-        ⇐ + Adhesions of variable severity may be
                       tions                  cal exam are used to preplan implant with a          present from prior surgery or radiation. Care
                                              computer dosimetry program. Patients require         should be taken to avoid possible bowel injury
                                              thorough preop mechanical and antibiotic bowel       at time of trocar insertion. Patient needs to be
                                              prep. Preop epidural placement or postop PCA         in steep Trendelenburg position for duration of
                                              (see p. C-3) may prove helpful for pain control.     procedure.
                                              Foley catheter needs to be inserted through an
                                              opening at the top of the clear plastic template
                                              prior to implant positioning.

                     Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 2 g or cefotetan 1–2 g iv; then q 12 h ×   ⇐
                                              3 doses

                     Surgical time            1.5–3 h                                              ⇐

                     EBL                      150–350 mL                                           Minimal

                     Closing considera-       Suture template to perineum. Perform rectal          ⇐ + Release the pneumoperitoneum com-
                       tions                  exam and adjust any needles that are too             pletely. Consider insertion of 1 L heparinized LR
                                              close to, or have protruded through, the rectal      to cause the bowel to float and remain mobile,
                                              mucosa. Pack any space between template              thus minimizing the risk of radiation injury.
                                              and perineum with Vaseline gauze. Obtain A-P
                                              and lateral orthogonal localization films with
                                              the patient in the supine bed-rest position.
                                              Insert Hypaque dye into Foley catheter balloon
                                              before localization films. Consider insertion of
                                              a large Foley into the rectum, and attach to a
                                              drainage bag. Consider NG tube placement.

===== PAGE 798 =====
798   CHAPTER 8.1          Gynecologic Oncology

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                    Postop care             Patient is confined to bed while interstitial     ⇐
                                                            implants are in place. SCDs and minidose
                                                            heparin for DVT prophylaxis. Vigorous use of
                                                            incentive spirometry. Consider constipating
                                                            medications (e.g., Lomotil). Patient must be
                                                            placed in a shielded room. Visitors and medi-
                                                            cal personnel should interact with patient from
                                                            behind a lead shield until radiation sources
                                                            have been removed.

                                    Mortality               0.1–0.3%                                          ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Hemorrhagic proctitis with diarrhea and tenes-    ⇐
                                                            mus: 7–18%
                                                            Radiation cystitis: 7–10%                         ⇐
                                                            Cervical necrosis: 5–6%                           ⇐
                                                            Rectovaginal fistula: < 5%                        ⇐
                                                            Vesicovaginal fistula: < 5%                       ⇐
                                                            Vaginal vault necrosis: 3–5%                      ⇐
                                                            Rectal fibrosis: 2–5%                             ⇐
                                                            Pelvic infection: 2–3%                            ⇐

                                    Pain score              8–9                                               8–9

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Age range               Reproductive and postreproductive age; childhood—rare

                                    Etiology                Cervical, vaginal, or vulvar carcinomas; pelvic recurrence of gynecologic malignancies
            Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Radiation implants are used for palliation or cure in cervical, endometrial, and ovarian cancer. The implants concen-
                                   trate the radiation close to the site of the tumor and may be supplemented by external beam radiation. The unique
                                   tolerance of the uterus and vagina to radiation permits large doses and accounts for the success in treating cervi-
                                   cal lesions. The sigmoid, rectum, and large bowel are much more sensitive to radiation injury, limiting the dose of
                                   radiation that may be given to the pelvis. There is a trend toward the use of sophisticated external beam radiation
                                   (intensity-modulated), resulting in fewer cases requiring radiation implants.

                                   Respiratory              Usually not significant unless underlying lung disease is present.

                                   Cardiovascular           Many patients with pelvic tumors are elderly and prone to cardiovascular disease.
                                                            Tests: ECG if age ≥ 60; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Hematologic              Tests: CBC, consider PT/PTT if at risk for coagulopathy.

                                   Laboratory               Renal panel

                                   Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

===== PAGE 799 =====
Interstitial Perineal Implants       799

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Regional or GA, depending on site involved. A postop epidural is useful for pain management.

                    Induction                   Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                    Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                    Emergence                   Consider PONV prophylaxis (see p. B-6).

                    Blood and fluid             Small blood loss
                       requirements             IV: 18–20 ga × 1
                                                NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1).

                    Positioning                 May be necessary to keep patient motionless during implant insertion.
                                                3and pad pressure points
                                                3eyes
                                                Antiembolism stockings and SCD

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Pain                       Epidural narcotics (see p. C-2).         Consider ketorolac 15–30 mg im/iv q 6 h for break-
                      management               PCA (see p. C-3).                        through pain. Implants are associated with significant
                                                                                        discomfort.

                                                                                                                                                                 Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                     1. Koh WJ, Sales LR: Principles of radiation therapy. In: Karlan BY, Bristow RE, Li AJ, eds. Gynecologic Oncology Clincal Practice
                        and Surgical Atlas, 1st edition. McGraw-Hill Co., San Francisco, 2012.
                     2. Perez CA, Hall EJ, Purdy JA, et al: Biologic and physical aspects of radiation oncology. In: Hoskins WJ, Perez CA, Young
                        RC, Barakat RR, et al, eds. Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology, 3rd edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                        Philadelphia: 2004, 327–402.
                     3. Syed AM, Puthawala AA, Abdelaziz NN, et al: Long-term results of low-dose-rate interstitial-intracavitary brachytherapy in
                        the treatment of carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2002: 54(1):67–78.

===== PAGE 800 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      8.2 Gynecology/
                                           Infertility Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Bertha Chen, MD
                                           Eva D. Littman, MD
                                           Amin A. Milki, MD
                                           Lynn M. Westphal, MD
                                           Brooke E. Friedman, MD

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD

===== PAGE 802 =====
DILATATION AND CURETTAGE (D&C)
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: During dilatation and curettage (D&C), the endometrial lining of the uterus and coexisting lesions
                                   (myoma, polyp) are sampled or removed. This procedure is performed to diagnose and treat bleeding from uterine
                                   and cervical lesions, to treat cervical stenosis, to complete an incomplete or missed spontaneous abortion, or as a
                                   method for pregnancy termination. A D&C is performed less frequently with the advent of the office endometrial
                                   biopsy and medical management of bleeding problems.
                                   With the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position, the surgeon initially performs a bimanual examination under
                                   anesthesia to obtain information about both the presence of adnexal pathology and anatomic detail of the uterus. A
                                   speculum is inserted into the vagina, and the cervix is grasped with a clamp. The cervix is pulled gently toward the
                                   operator, who then uses a uterine probe to delineate the length of the uterus and the angulation between the cervical
                                   canal and uterus. The uterine cavity is reached by dilating the cervical canal with progressively larger dilators (Hegar’s
                                   or Pratt) to an 8- to 9-mm diameter. A ureteral stone forceps is often used at this stage to remove existing polyps,
                                   and a curette is used to systematically remove the endometrial lining (Fig. 8.2-1). A suction curette is often used for
                                   abortion procedures.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Uncontrolled uterine bleeding refractory to hormonal treatment in young women;
                                   abnormal uterine bleeding; incomplete, missed, or induced abortion; pregnancy termination; cervical stenosis
                                    causing dysmenorrhea or obstruction of menstrual flow.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Dorsal lithotomy with stirrups
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Incision                 None
            Surgery

                                    Special                  To prevent peroneal nerve injury, the area of the leg leaning against the stirrup should be well
                                      instrumentation        cushioned.

                                    Unique                   Following induction, perineum is positioned at the very end of the table to ensure optimum
                                      considerations         exposure. During the cervical dilatation, a vasovagal response can occur, with subsequent
                                                             bradycardia and ↓ BP. Uterine perforations will often manifest as severe postop pain.

                                    Antibiotics              Doxycycline 100 mg iv

                                    Surgical time            5–15 min

                                    EBL                      50–100 mL

                                    Mortality                Minimal

                                    Morbidity                Postop fever: 1.7%
                                                             Uterine perforation: 0.63%
                                                             Severe immediate postop bleeding (caused by either uterine artery perforation or
                                                             cervical injury): < 1%

                                    Pain score               3–5

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                20–80 yr

                                    Incidence                > 1/50 females

                                    Etiology                 Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, endometrial pathology, pregnancy issues

                                    Associated               Obesity; HTN
                                      conditions

                             802

===== PAGE 803 =====
Therapeutic Abortion, Dilatation, and Evacuation (D&E)               803

                               Figure 8.2-1. Curettage of endometrial lining. (Reproduced with permission from
                               Rock JA, Thompson JD, eds: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Lippincott
                               Williams & Wilkins: 2008.)

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                 Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Therapeutic Abortion, Dilatation, and Evacuation, p. 805.
                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                     1. Bulter WJ, Carnovale DE: Normal and abnormal uterine bleeding. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology,
                        10th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 585–608.
                     2. Mackenzie IZ, Bibby JG: Critical assessment of dilatation and curettage in 1029 women. Lancet 1978; 2(8089):566–8.
                     3. Stovall TG: Early pregnancy loss and ectopic pregnancy: In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.

                   THERAPEUTIC ABORTION, DILATATION, AND
                   EVACUATION (D&E)
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Therapeutic abortion (TAB) is the elective termination of a pregnancy prior to viability (usually
                   considered to be 24 wk). In 2008, 2 million abortions were reported in the United States, a rate of 19.6 abortions per
                   1000 women aged 14–44. Suction curettage is the most efficient method to terminate pregnancies during the first
                   trimester (< 12 wk), and the great majority of abortions are performed this way. Few (< 5%) first trimester abortions
                   in the United States are performed with a sharp curette. Increased operative time and blood loss are seen with this
                   method, resulting in its being practiced mainly in locations where a suction apparatus is not available. Suction curet-
                   tage for a spontaneous abortion is performed in a manner identical to a regular TAB, except that a cervical dilatation
                   might not be needed. Very early termination can be performed without anesthesia via medical termination.
                   The TAB procedure consists of a standard cervical dilatation (required for gestations > 6 wk), followed by vacuum
                   aspiration of the uterine contents using a plastic suction curette (Fig. 8.2-2). Alternatively, the cervical canal can

===== PAGE 804 =====
804   c h a p t e r 8.2     Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                               Figure 8.2-2. Uterine aspiration. Top—uterus at beginning of procedure; bottom—at
                                               conclusion of procedure. (Reproduced with permission from Rock JA, Thompson JD,
                                               eds: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 8th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

                                   be dilated > 6 hr prior to the operation with laminaria or synthetic osmotic dilators, which, after insertion, swell to
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   provide dilatation. A sharp curette is sometimes used at the very end to gently verify the emptiness of the cavity. Due
                                   to the risk of missing the pregnancy, most physicians wait until 7–8 wk following the LMP before performing the
            Surgery

                                   operation. Ergonovine maleate (0.2 mg im) and oxytocin (Pitocin) 20–30 U/1000 mL iv can be administered during
                                   the procedure to reduce bleeding, although the efficacy of oxytocin has been questioned. The procedure is performed
                                   under either local with or without iv sedation or GA; it is generally felt that local is safer. Regardless of the method
                                   used, the obtained products of conception (POC) are sent for histological examination to exclude the presence of
                                   trophoblastic neoplasm or ectopic pregnancy.
                                   Variant procedure: Dilatation and evacuation (D&E) remains the safest method for midtrimester pregnancy
                                   termination. It is performed similar to first-trimester suction curettage with the addition of using large-ring forceps
                                   to grasp and remove fetal parts intermittently. This procedure is often performed under GA.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Pregnancy (viable or nonviable): 52% within 8-wk estimated gestational age; 90% within
                                   12-wk estimated gestational age.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE

                                                            1st-Trimester Suction Curettage or 2nd-Trimester D&E

                                    Position                Dorsal lithotomy with patient in Allen stirrups. Following induction, perineum positioned at end of
                                                            table to ensure optimum exposure.

                                    Incision                None

                                    Special                 Suction; + large-ring forceps for 2nd trimester D&E
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  To prevent peroneal nerve injury, the area of the leg leaning against stirrup should be cushioned
                                      considerations        well. During cervical dilatation, a vasovagal reaction can occur → ↓ HR + ↓ BP. During injection of
                                                            lidocaine for paracervical block, seizure may occur. Uterine perforations often will cause e
                                                                                                                                                        xcessive
                                                            postop pain.

                                    Antibiotics             Doxycycline 100 mg iv

===== PAGE 805 =====
Therapeutic Abortion, Dilatation, and Evacuation (D&E)   805

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Surgical time        5–15 min; 15–45 min (2nd trimester D&E)

                     EBL                  Number week gestation:
                                            1–4 – 10 mL
                                            5–8 – 10–30 mL
                                            9–10 – 30–80 mL
                                            11–12 – 80–200 mL
                                            13–14 – 200–400 mL
                                            300–500 mL (2nd trimester D&E)

                     Postop care          PACU

                     Mortality            0–3.1/100,000; 13/100,000 (2nd trimester D&E)

                     Morbidity            Mild infection                     1/216       for 2nd trimester D&E:
                                          Resuctioned day of surgery         1/553         T > 38° for > l d       13.4/1000
                                          Resuctioned subsequently           1/596         Cervical injury         11.6/1000
                                          Cervical stenosis causing          1/6071        Cervical tear           10/1000
                                          amenorrhea                                       Retained POC            9/1000
                                          Cervical incompetence              1/9444        Hemorrhage              7.1/1000
                                          Underestimation of gestational     1/15,454      UTI                     1.8/1000
                                          age
                                          Seizure (after local anesthesia)   1/25,086

                     Complications        Incomplete abortion                1/3617      for 2nd trimester: D&E:
                       requiring          Sepsis                             1/4722         Endometritis           8.5/1000
                       hospitalization    Uterine perforation                1/10,625       Uterine perforation    3.2/1000
                                                                                            Need for laparotomy    2.1/1000

                                                                                                                                              Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                          Vaginal bleeding                   1/14,166
                                          Inability to complete              1/28,333       Need for blood         1.9/1000
                                          Coexisting tubal pregnancy         1/42,500      transfusion

                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                                          Total                              1/1405

                     Pain score           5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range            15–45 yr

                     Incidence            Abortions: 19.6/1000 women age 14–44 yr in the United States (2008.)

                     Etiology             Desire for pregnancy termination

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR D&C, TAB, D&E
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   These are among the most common procedures performed in gynecology. Patients presenting for these procedures
                   are generally healthy; however, bleeding and sepsis may alter ASA status.

                    Cardiovascular        Hemodynamic status may be impaired 2° preop uterine bleeding, and patient may be septic
                                          from retained uterine products. 3BP and HR.
                                          Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory            Hb/Hct; consider T & S/T & cross; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication         Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

===== PAGE 806 =====
806   c h a p t e r 8.2   Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Local/MAC, regional, or GA all may be appropriate. In the younger patient population,
                                   spinal anesthesia may be less desirable because of increased incidence of postdural puncture headache (PDPH).
                                   Local anesthesia: Some obstetricians/gynecologists perform these procedures under local anesthesia. Paracervi-
                                   cal block has the potential for inadvertent iv administration, with consequent local anesthetic toxicity.
                                   Regional anesthesia: A T10 sensory level is sufficient to provide anesthesia for procedures on the uterus.

                                   Spinal                   0.75% bupivacaine 7.5–12 mg in 8.25% dextrose ± 10–20 mcg fentanyl (IT). (See Anes-
                                                            thetic Considerations for Cesarean Section, p. 835.) If spinal anesthesia is indicated, a pen-
                                                            cil-point spinal needle (e.g., Whitacre or Sprotte) should be used to decrease the i ncidence
                                                            of PDPH.

                                   Epidural                 1.5–2.0% lidocaine with epinephrine 5 mcg/mL (1:200,000), 15–20 mL. Supplemental
                                                            iv sedation. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean Section, p. 835.)

                                   CSE                      Combined spinal/epidural (CSE): An alternative technique combining the rapid onset
                                                            and density of spinal anesthesia with the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia.
                                                            Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position patient as for spinal or epidural. The most
                                                            common technique is the needle-through-needle. After the epidural space is located
                                                            with a standard 17 ga Tuohy needle, insert a 4” 26- to 27-ga pencil-point spinal needle
                                                            through it to administer 7.5–12 mg of spinal bupivacaine (0.75%) ± fentanyl 10–20 mcg
                                                            and ± morphine sulfate 0.1–0.2 mg. Secure the epidural catheter and use if needed (a test
                                                            dose is advisable).
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   General anesthesia:
            Surgery

                                   Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                                   Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3) used commonly, although frequently done by mask
                                                            with O2/N2O + volatile anesthetic and spontaneous ventilation. May also use propofol
                                                            infusion (50–200 mcg/kg/min), ± inhaled anesthetics. A small amount of opiate may be
                                                            used. Consider keeping MAC < 1 to lower the risk of uterine atony + bleeding. Consider
                                                            RSI if 2nd or 3rd trimester to lower risk of aspiration.

                                   Emergence                Be ready with suction in the event of vomiting on emergence. Consider NSAIDS iv. Con-
                                                            sider ketorolac (15–30 mg) after bleeding controlled.

                                   Blood and fluid          Minimal blood loss                      Usual replacement of maintenance fluids and over-
                                      requirements          IV: 18 ga × 1 (unless hypovolemic)      night deficit with crystalloid to restore euvolemia.
                                                            NS/LR at 2 mL/kg/h                      Blood transfusion rarely indicated.

                                   Control of blood         Oxytocin 20–30 U/L iv                   Oxytocin causes uterine contraction, with a con-
                                     loss                   Methylergonovine maleate                sequent decrease in blood loss. Rapid iv bolus may
                                                            0.2 mg im                               lead to hypotension. 20–30 U Oxytocin is usually
                                                                                                    diluted in 1 L of crystalloid and then infused. Meth-
                                                                                                    ylergonovine maleate also causes uterine contrac-
                                                                                                    tion. Dose is usually 0.2 mg im. Side effects include
                                                                                                    HTN, myocardial ischemia and dysrhythmias. Do
                                                                                                    not give iv.

                                   Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                                   Positioning              3 hip, leg, hand position               Lithotomy position may worsen pulmonary func-
                                                            3 and pad pressure points               tion. Consider L uterine displacement if > 20 weeks,
                                                            3 eyes                                  or < 20 weeks if cardiovascular instability.
                                                            Shoulder abducted < 90°

===== PAGE 807 =====
Hysteroscopy        807

                    Vagal stimulation          Bradycardia                                 When the cervix is grasped and dilated, the patient
                                                                                           may have excessive vagal stimulation, which can
                                                                                           be treated by prompt cessation of stimulation and
                                                                                           glycopyrrolate 0.1–0.2 mg iv, or if preferred, atro-
                                                                                           pine 0.2–0.4 mg.

                    Complications              Nerve injury                                Common peroneal nerve palsy (e.g., foot drop) is
                                                                                           possible if pressure on the nerve over the fibula is
                                                                                           not prevented by adequate padding or positioning.
                                                                                           Hyperflexion of the hip joint can cause femoral and
                                                                                           lateral femoral cutaneous nerve palsy. Obturator
                                                                                           and saphenous nerve injury are also complications
                                                                                           of the lithotomy position.
                                               Finger trauma                               Take care to ensure safety of patient’s fingers when
                                                                                           manipulating foot of the bed. Avoid finger injury by
                                                                                           placing patient’s arms on arm boards or by wrap-
                                                                                           ping her hands.
                                               Laryngospasm                                Avoid light anesthesia.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              PONV (see p. B-6).
                                               Uterine perforation with severe
                                               abdominal pain (rare)

                                                                                                                                                                 Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                               Severe hemorrhage, necessitating            Severe postop bleeding may be caused by uterine
                                               blood transfusion (rare)                    atony, retained POCs, uterine perforation, or cervi-

                                                                                                                                                                        Surgery
                                                                                           cal injury.

                    Pain                       IV opiates                                  Fentanyl Oral pain medications may be satisfactory.
                      management                                                           With extreme pain consider uterine perforation.
                                               Oral analgesia                              Tylenol +/- opiates, NSAIDs

                    Tests                      Hb/Hct, if hemorrhage

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Grimes DA: Management of abortion. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 9th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2003, 483–506.
                     2. Stovall TG: Early pregnancy loss and ectopic pregnancy: In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.

                   HYSTEROSCOPY
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Hysteroscopy is a procedure in which the endometrial cavity can be examined, allowing for direct
                   visualization of lesions. The procedure is used primarily to investigate abnormal uterine bleeding, often caused by
                   intrauterine submucous myoma and polyps. After the diagnosis, these lesions can be removed through the operative
                   hysteroscope using a variety of techniques.
                   Variant procedure or approaches: Diagnostic hysteroscopies can be performed under both GA and local anes-
                   thesia with iv sedation, whereas operative hysteroscopies are usually performed under GA. An examination under

===== PAGE 808 =====
808   c h a p t e r 8.2    Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                               Figure 8.2-3. Hysteroscopy. (Reproduced with permission from Baggish MS, Barbot
                                               S, Valle RF: Diagnostic & Operative Hysteroscopy. Year Book Medical Pub: 1989.)
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   anesthesia is performed, followed by the insertion of open speculum and the attachment of a tenaculum to the
            Surgery

                                   cervix. The cervical canal is dilated until the hysteroscope can be introduced with its sheath (Fig. 8.2-3). A disten-
                                   tion medium—usually a low-viscosity fluid—is then used to provide visualization of the uterine cavity. It has been
                                   recommended that no more than 500 mL of this solution be used. The most commonly used low-viscosity fluids are
                                   NS, sorbitol 3%/mannitol 0.5%, and mannitol 5% solutions. NS is most commonly used for diagnostic hysteroscopies,
                                   whereas the other nonconductive fluids are used for operative hysteroscopies. Certain bipolar operative hysterosco-
                                   pies also allow the use of NS.
                                   It is important for the surgeon to be vigilant regarding the fluid uptake by closely monitoring the infused volume and
                                   the collected volume. At a fluid uptake of 500 mL of a hypoosmolar solution (e.g., sorbitol/mannitol) or 1000 mL of
                                   an isoosmolar solution (e.g., NS), consideration should be given to stopping the procedure given concerns for fluid
                                   overload. Communication between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is essential, as iv fluids can add to increased
                                   circulatory volume and potential fluid overload.
                                   The distension medium is delivered to the hysteroscope by means of gravity or by a pump. Most systems use grav-
                                   ity, whereby the fluid is delivered via a wide-bore tubing and the maximum intrauterine pressure (IUP) is deter-
                                   mined by the height of the fluid container above the uterus. The maximum IUP is thus limited by gravity, making
                                   this system relatively safe. The lowest IUP necessary to provide adequate visualization should be used to decrease
                                   the rate of absorption of the distention medium. A video camera is usually attached to the hysteroscope to allow
                                   for easier visualization. During operative cases, an accompanying laparoscope is sometimes inserted into the
                                   abdomen to evaluate the progress of the hysteroscopy and to safeguard against uterine perforation and potential
                                   bowel injury.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Abnormal uterine bleeding; infertility; recurrent pregnancy loss

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Dorsal lithotomy (Allen stirrups)

                                    Incision                None

===== PAGE 809 =====
Hysteroscopy     809

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Special               Fluid pump; laser; electrocautery equipment
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                Accelerated fluid absorption with prolonged procedures or with resections may → pulmonary
                       considerations      edema. Laparoscopy may accompany this procedure.

                     Surgical time         15 min to 2 h

                     Antibiotics           Cefazolin 1 g iv

                     EBL                   0–100 mL

                     Postop care           Excessive postop bleeding can be controlled by using a 5-mL Foley balloon catheter in the uterus
                                           for several h.

                     Mortality             Minimal

                     Morbidity             Pleural effusion can be seen with use of low-viscosity medium.

                     Pain score            3–5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             20–80 yr

                     Incidence             > 1/50

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Etiology              Unexplained uterine bleeding; infertility

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                     Associated            Obesity
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Hysteroscopy may be performed for diagnosis or treatment of intrauterine pathology.

                    Cardiovascular           As patient may be undergoing hysteroscopy for uterine bleeding, consider hypovolemia
                                             and anemia. 3BP, HR and consider Orthostatic VS.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct if bleeding Hx. Other tests as indicated from H&P; consider pregnancy testing.

                    Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Local, regional, or GA may be used. If spinal anesthesia is indicated, pencil-point spinal
                   needles (e.g., Sprotte or Whitacre) should be used to decrease the incidence of PDPH.
                   Local anesthesia: Some procedures may be done under local, usually with supplemental iv sedation, especially if
                   they are diagnostic. Paracervical block has the potential for an inadvertent intravenous administration, with local
                   anesthetic toxicity.
                   Regional anesthesia: A T10 sensory level is sufficient to provide anesthesia for these procedures.

===== PAGE 810 =====
810   c h a p t e r 8.2   Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Spinal                  0.75% bupivacaine 7.5–10 mg in 8.25% dextrose ± 10–20 mcg fentanyl. (See Anesthetic
                                                           Considerations for Cesarean Section, p. 835.)

                                   Epidural                1.5–2.0% lidocaine with epinephrine 5 mcg/mL (1:200,000), 15–20 mL; Supplemental iv
                                                           sedation. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean Section, p. 835.)

                                   CSE                     Combined spinal/epidural (CSE): An alternative technique combining the rapid onset
                                                           and density of spinal anesthesia with the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia.
                                                           Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position patient as for spinal or epidural. The most
                                                           common technique is the needle-through-needle. After the epidural space is located with
                                                           a standard 17-ga Tuohy needle, insert a 4” 26- to 27-ga pencil-point spinal needle through
                                                           it to administer 7.5–12 mg of spinal bupivacaine (0.75%) ± fentanyl 10–20 mcg and
                                                           ± morphine sulfate 0.1–0.2 mg. Secure the epidural catheter and use if needed (a test dose
                                                           is advisable).

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2). LMA may be appropriate

                                   Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                                   Emergence               Standard emergence

                                   Blood and fluid         Minimal blood loss
                                      requirements         IV: 18–20 ga × 1
                                                           NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Positioning             3 hip, leg, and hand positions        Lithotomy position can be deleterious to pul-
                                                           3 and pad pressure points             monary function, as it may impair respiratory
            Surgery

                                                           3 eyes                                mechanics. Common peroneal nerve palsy is pos-
                                                           Shoulder abduction < 90°              sible if pressure on the nerve over the fibula is not
                                                                                                 prevented by adequate padding or positioning.
                                                                                                 Hyperflexion of hip joint can cause femoral and
                                                                                                 lateral femoral cutaneous nerve palsy. Obturator
                                                                                                 and saphenous nerve injury are also complications
                                                                                                 of the lithotomy position.

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1).

                                   Surgical                When cervix is grasped and dilated,   Rx: prompt cessation of stimulation by surgeons
                                     stimulation           patient may have excessive vagal      and treatment with glycopyrrolate (0.1–0.2 mg) or
                                                           nerve stimulation.                    atropine (0.2–0.4 mg).

                                   Complications           Pulmonary and cerebral edema          Air embolism can occur with the use of gas disten-
                                                           (2° hypotonic fluid overload)         tion media; thus, most institutions currently use
                                                           Coagulopathy                          low-viscosity fluids for distension. Low-viscosity
                                                           Air embolism                          media can be grouped, based on their tonicity and
                                                           Anaphylactoid reactions               electrolyte content: (1) hypotonic, electrolyte-free
                                                                                                 media that may cause hypotonic fluid overload; and
                                                                                                 (2) isotonic, electrolyte-containing media that may
                                                                                                 cause isotonic fluid overload. It is not uncommon to
                                                                                                 use 10–20 L of distention fluid during an operative
                                                                                                 hysteroscopy. Monitor for fluid balance. Adjust iv
                                                                                                 fluid to maintain euvolemia.
                                                           Finger injury (2° positioning)        When manipulating the foot of the bed, avoid finger
                                                                                                 injury by placing patient’s arms on arm boards or by
                                                                                                 wrapping her hands.

===== PAGE 811 =====
Pelvic Laparotomy        811

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications             PONV (see p. B-6)
                                              Fluid overload/pulmonary edema
                                                from excessive fluid absorption

                    Pain                      Small dose of titrated opiate             Patients usually tolerate oral pain medications.
                      management              Oral analgesia                            Acetominophen +/- opiates, NSAIDs

                    Tests                     Consider CXR and ABG                      For patient with respiratory compromise (rare)
                                              Serum electrolytes

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Baggish MS: Operative hysteroscopy. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 336–9.
                     2. Cooper JM, Brady RM: Intraoperative and early postoperative complications of operative hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin
                        North Am 2000; 27(2):247–66.
                     3. Stovall TG: Hysteroscopy. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                        Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.

                   PELVIC LAPAROTOMY

                                                                                                                                                           Obstetric/Gynecologic
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                   Description: Laparotomy and its variants are all common gynecological procedures. Laparotomy is most f requently
                   performed via a Pfannenstiel incision, which permits good pelvic exposure. A vertical incision is used in oncologi-
                   cal surgery or in the presence of a large uterus. A knife or electrocautery (Bovie) is used to cut through the skin and
                   underlying tissue until the rectus fascia is reached. The fascia is nicked and then sharply incised bilaterally 2–4” with
                   scissors or Bovie. The rectus muscle is separated sharply in the midline down to the pubis, and the peritoneum is
                   entered. The peritoneal incision is then extended vertically or transversely. The pelvis and entire abdominal cavity
                   are explored first by palpation. Then the bowels are usually packed in a cephalad direction with surgical laparotomy
                   sponges (laps) to prevent them from falling back into the pelvis. Good muscle relaxation is important during this
                   stage to ensure optimal packing. A self-retaining retractor is frequently used to keep the laps in place and to enhance
                   exposure. After the desired operation has been performed, the retractor and packs are removed. During the peri-
                   toneal closure, abdominal muscle relaxation is again important to minimize tension on this layer and risk of bowel
                   injury with the needle. The rectus fascia, the subcutaneous tissue, and the skin are closed in succession.
                   Variant procedures: Myomectomies are performed to remove myomata that are causing pain, abnormal bleeding,
                   or infertility. Myomata are heavily vascularized at the base, and the surgeon has several ways to minimize this bleeding.
                   A clamp can be placed across the uterine vasculature to minimize blood flow to the uterus. A common alternative is
                   the use of a vasoconstrictor, such as a diluted epinephrine (1:200,000) or vasopressin (1–5 U/10 mL NS) solution. The
                   solution (2–10 mL) is injected around the myoma prior to incising the uterus, which invariably →↑ HR (epi) or ↓ HR
                   (vasopressin) and ↑ BP. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (Gn-RH) agonists may be used for a few months prior to the
                   operation to render the patient hypoestrogenic and, thus, decrease the vascularity of the myomata. After the myomata
                   have been removed, the uterine defects are closed with several layers of suture, and the uterine serosa is closed.
                   Ovarian cystectomies are performed to alleviate related pain and to diagnose the identity of asymptomatic cysts.
                   Small, single-functional ovarian cysts are found at different stages in a woman’s menstrual cycle. At times, these cysts
                   can increase in size and quantity, which may cause severe pain. The ovary can also contain various nonfunctional
                   cysts (e.g., tumors) which have to be removed, even if asymptomatic, to exclude malignancy. After the pelvic struc-
                   tures are well visualized, the cystic ovary is stabilized with instruments or surgical laps. Sharp or blunt dissection
                   is used to shell out the cyst intact. If there is any suspicion about the nature of the cyst, an intraop frozen section is
                   obtained. The ovary is then reapproximated and the abdomen closed. If the cyst is large and little healthy ovarian
                   stroma remains, an oophorectomy is performed.

===== PAGE 812 =====
812   c h a p t e r 8.2     Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Ectopic pregnancies are usually medical emergencies. Laparoscopy is the most common method, although proce-
                                   dure may be performed open. The abdomen is entered, and the pregnancy located quickly. An attempt is made to
                                   control the bleeding with the surgeon’s hand, clamp, or suture. Frequently, large amounts of blood in the pelvis are
                                   suctioned, and the ectopic pregnancy is removed via a partial tubal resection, salpingostomy, or salpingectomy;
                                   then the abdomen is closed. A D&C may be performed at the end to prevent late bleeding from the pregnancy-
                                   induced endometrial proliferation (see p. 802).
                                   In abdominal, laparoscopic, or robotic colpopexy (fixation of vagina), the patient is placed in the lithotomy posi-
                                   tion, usually with Allen stirrups, to perform an examination under anesthesia, as well as to insert a vaginal pack need-
                                   ed to identify the vaginal apex. A urethral catheter is inserted prior to staging the laparotomy, laparoscopy, or robotic
                                   surgery. Typically, a synthetic graft is used. The bowel is packed and the defect is examined from the abdominal per-
                                   spective. Frequently there is an accompanying enterocele that must be closed initially (see M   oschowitz procedure,
                                   below). The peritoneum over the vaginal apex is then entered, and the neighboring rectum and bladder are dissected
                                   a distance away from the vaginal apex. The peritoneum over the sacrum is incised, and the cephalad end of the graft is
                                   sutured to the anterior sacral ligament of the third vertebrae. Severe bleeding can occur if there is injury to the middle
                                   sacral artery. The caudal end of the graft is attached to the vaginal apex. The peritoneum and abdomen are closed, and
                                   the patient’s legs are elevated to the dorsal lithotomy position for a high-posterior colporrhaphy (repair of vagina).
                                   The Moschowitz procedure is used to reduce enteroceles via an abdominal approach. The abdomen is entered in
                                   the usual fashion, the uterus held up with a traction suture, the bowel packed, and the patient placed in the Tren-
                                   delenburg position. Multiple concentric purse-string sutures are used to close the defect in the pouch of Douglas,
                                   and the abdomen is closed. A McCall’s procedure can also be performed to prevent enterocele formation. Here the
                                   uterosacral ligaments are plicated and sutured together in the midline, at the level of the pouch of Douglas, to oblit-
                                   erate that space.
                                   The presacral neurectomy is an operation performed for women with severe chronic midline pelvic pain. Usually
                                   the patient has a history of prior surgeries to diagnose and treat the problem. A laparotomy is initially performed with
                                   packing of the bowels. The rectosigmoid is brought over to the left to make a vertical, posterior, parietal, peritoneal
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   incision over the sacral area. The anatomy is examined closely, and the presacral nerves are obliterated or excised;
                                   then the peritoneum and abdomen are closed. Severe bleeding can be seen intraop from the hemorrhoidal and sacral
            Surgery

                                   veins, but can usually be controlled with pressure.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Myomata (pelvic pain, menorrhagia, pelvic pressure symptoms, infertility); ovarian cysts
                                   and pelvic pain with undiagnosed ovarian mass; ectopic pregnancy; vaginal vault prolapse; enterocele; presacral
                                   neurectomy (chronic pelvic pain)

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine or lithotomy

                                    Incision                 Pfannenstiel or low midline abdominal laparoscopic or robotic incisions

                                    Unique                   Muscle relaxation is important during bowel packing and abdominal closure. Vasoconstrictor solu-
                                      considerations         tions for controlling myomata bleeding (1:200,000 epinephrine and 1–5 U vasopressin/10 mL
                                                             NS) are often used and can alter BP and HR.

                                    Antibiotics              1–2 g iv cefoxitin or cefotetan

                                    Surgical time            45 min–4 h
                                                             Abdominal colpopexy: 4–5 h

                                    EBL                      150–1000 mL (maximum related to procedure)

                                    Postop care              PACU

                                    Mortality                Minimal

                                    Morbidity                Gastric dilatation: 3%
                                                             Thrombophlebitis: 3%
                                                             PE: 2%
                                                             Ureteral stenosis: 1%

                                    Pain score               8

===== PAGE 813 =====
Transvaginal Oocyte Retrieval        813

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                 Ovarian                                  Abdominal
                                                                 Cystectomy,          Ectopic             Colpopexy,          Presacral
                                             Myomectomy          Oophorectomy         Pregnancy           Moschowitz          Neurectomy

                     Age range               20–45 yr            20–85 yr             15–45 yr            40–80 yr            20–50 yr

                     Incidence               > 1/5 females       ⇐                    1/100 females       1/500 females       ⇐

                     Etiology                Congenital          Endometriosis        Preexisting         Multiparous         Endometriosis
                                                                 Anovulation          tubal disease       Obesity
                                                                 Adenoma                                  Chronic cough
                                                                                                          older age group

                     Associated              Menorrhagia         Endometriosis        Pelvic adhesions    Pelvic relaxation   Endometriosis
                       conditions            and pelvic symp-
                                             toms associated
                                             with bulk.

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Infertility Operations, p. 816.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Berek JS, ed: Berek & Novak’s Gynecology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007.
                     2. Rock JA, Jones HW, eds: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology. 14th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008.
                     3. Sharp HT, Francis SL, Murphy AA: Operative hysteroscopy. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology.

                                                                                                                                                           Obstetric/Gynecologic
                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2008, 336–70.

                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                   TRANSVAGINAL OOCYTE RETRIEVAL (TVOR)
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Transvaginal oocyte retrieval (TVOR) is performed on patients who have undergone ovarian stimu-
                   lation using ovulation-inducing agents. This procedure is performed 35–36 h after the patient has been injected
                   with human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) to induce oocyte maturation. It is very important for the success of the
                   procedure that retrieval be performed within this time period. If a retrieval is performed too late, ovulation will have
                   occurred, and oocyte retrieval will no longer be possible.
                   In the procedure room, the patient is placed in the dorsal lithotomy position, and moderate to heavy iv sedation is
                   started. A sterile speculum is inserted into the vagina and a vaginal prep is performed. Next an ultrasound probe with
                   a 16- to 17-ga needle on a needle guide is placed into the patient’s vagina. One of the ovaries is identified and entered
                   by inserting the needle through the vaginal fornix. Patients may experience a combination of pain and pressure at
                   this point in the procedure. After the needle is in the ovary, the surgeon will then proceed with sequential aspiration
                   of the ovarian follicles. It is important that the patient remain relaxed and motionless as movement may prevent as-
                   piration of oocytes and increase the risk of injury to the surrounding organs and vessels. After retrieval is completed
                   in the first ovary, the needle is withdrawn; the other ovary is identified, and a second puncture is made through the
                   vaginal fornix. Procedure duration is 10–30 min, depending on the number of follicles present. After all of the fol-
                   licles have been aspirated, the needle and ultrasound probe are removed. A sterile speculum is then reintroduced into
                   the vagina, and the vaginal wall and cervix are inspected for hemostasis. Pressure is applied for 3–5 min if bleeding
                   is noted. The patient is then recovered for 30–60 min before going home.

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Dorsal lithotomy

                     Incision                Vaginal punctures (usually 2)

===== PAGE 814 =====
814   c h a p t e r 8.2    Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Special                 Ultrasound probe with needle guide, 16- to 17-ga needle
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  Requires complete relaxation/sedation to prevent injury and loss of oocyte during follicle
                                      considerations        aspiration.

                                    Antibiotics             Cefotetan of cefazolin 1 g iv prior to procedure

                                    Procedure time          Setup: 5–10 min
                                                            Procedure: 10–30 min (depending on # of follicles)

                                    Postop care             PACU→ Home

                                    Morbidity               Bleeding: rare
                                                            Infection: rare

                                    Pain score              1–3 (abdominal cramping)

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               18–50 yr (rare after age 43)

                                    Incidence               It is estimated that at least 14% of American couples of reproductive age who desire pregnancy
                                                            are unable to conceive within 1 yr.

                                    Etiology                A male factor is responsible for 35%; pelvic factor, 25%; ovulatory factor, 20%; cervical factor,
                                                            10%; and 10% are unexplained.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Associated              Thyroid disorders; polycystic ovarian syndrome; endometriosis; depression
                                      conditions
            Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   This is generally a healthy patient population. Little is required beyond routine tests, unless otherwise indicated.

                                   Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication             Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Moderate to heavy iv sedation or, rarely, local or regional anesthesia and GA have been
                                   used. Intravenous sedation (hypnotic agent, ± benzodiazepine, ± a narcotic analgesic), however, propofol is the most
                                   commonly used and the safest technique for IVF. The most stimulating parts of the procedure occur when the vaginal
                                   fornix is pierced on each side and when the ovarian follicles are entered for aspiration of the eggs.

                                   MAC                       Propofol infusion (50–200 mcg/kg/min), ± midazolam (1–2 mg iv) and ± fentanyl titrated
                                                             to achieve the desired combination of moderate to heavy sedation and analgesia (see
                                                             p. B-5).

                                   Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss
                                      requirements           IV: 20–22 ga × 1

                                   Monitoring                Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                                   Positioning               3 hip, leg, and hand positions
                                                             3 and pad pressure points

===== PAGE 815 =====
Infertility Operations/Assisted Reproductive Technologies               815

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              PONV (p. B-6)                              PONV rare with propofol based-TIVA. Minimal
                                               Bleeding: rare                             post op pain →limit intraop opiates.

                    Pain                       Pain: usually minimal                      Oral analgesics are usually sufficient or small doses
                      management                                                          fentanyl (25–50 mcg iv).

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Baggish MS: Operative hysteroscopy. In: Rock JA, Jones HW. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Lippincott
                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008.
                     2. Burney RO, Schust DJ, Yao MW: Infertility: In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 1185–276.
                     3. Hadimioglu N, Titiz TA, Dosemeci L, et al: Comparison of various sedation regimens for transvaginal oocyte retrieval.
                        Fertility Sterility 2002; 78(3):648–9.
                     4. Meniru GI: Cambridge Guide to Infertility Management and Assisted Reproduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge:
                        2001, 130–1.

                   INFERTILITY OPERATIONS/ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE
                   TECHNOLOGIES

                                                                                                                                                               Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                      Surgery
                         SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: These operations all deal with reproductive problems. The general trend is to avoid laparotomies and
                   to perform operations using outpatient laparoscopy and hysteroscopy techniques whenever possible.
                   Fimbrioplasty is used to repair distal fallopian tubal occlusion—a common cause for infertility—which is usually
                   a consequence of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). The operation may be performed by pelvic laparotomy or
                   laparoscopy (see p. 811). If done by laparotomy, a urethral catheter is inserted to empty the bladder, followed by
                   the insertion of a transcervical uterine catheter for chromopertubation (dye injection). The abdomen is opened,
                   and the pelvic structures are exposed. During the operation, microsurgical techniques are followed closely to
                   minimize trauma. Meticulous hemostasis is important. A wound protector is often used instead of self-retaining
                   retractors. The peritoneum and pelvic structures are kept moist with intermittent irrigation. Salpingolysis and
                   ovariolysis may be performed microsurgically. After the adnexae have been freed, they are elevated by loosely
                   packing the pouch of Douglas with insulated pads (plastic sheathed covered laps). Chromopertubation is then
                   performed and, if occlusion is present, a new stoma is created using microsurgical instruments and sutures. The
                   abdomen is then closed.
                   Tubal reanastomosis, performed to restore fertility, is very similar to fimbrioplasty, with microsurgical techniques
                   followed diligently. After the tubal segments have been freed slightly from their underlying mesosalpinx, the oc-
                   cluded ends are cut, and chromopertubation is performed to ensure patency. After patency has been established,
                   anastomosis is performed in two layers. The mesosalpinx is reapproximated to the tubal serosa and the abdomen
                   closed.
                   The uterus is embryologically formed by the fusion of two paramesonephric tubes. At times, the fusion is incomplete,
                   and a septated uterus or bicornuate uterus is formed. The malformed uterus is associated with an increased risk for
                   miscarriages and preterm labor. Metroplasty is used to correct this condition. The Strassmann procedure (ex-
                   tremely rare) for bicornuate uteri uses a standard pelvic laparotomy. Following uterine exposure, an incision is made
                   on the medial side of each hemicorpus and carried down until the uterine cavity is entered. The edges are reapproxi-
                   mated to form a single uterus. Septated uteri are usually repaired via a hysteroscopic approach (see Hysteroscopy,
                   p. 807) with scissors or laser.

===== PAGE 816 =====
816   c h a p t e r 8.2    Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Proximal tubal cannulation is a procedure in which proximal tubal occlusion can be repaired through either
                                   fluoroscopic or hysteroscopic approach. The hysteroscopic approach, usually performed under GA, allows the sur-
                                   geon to insert a small cannula to restore tube patency. This procedure is often done with laparoscopy to follow the
                                   progress of the cannulization and to visualize the chromopertubation (see Hysteroscopy, p. 807, and Laparoscopy,
                                   p. 862).
                                   Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT), and tubal embryo transfer
                                   (TET) are methods of assisted reproductive technology (ART), but are seldom used. Couples who have un-
                                   dergone extensive infertility workups and treatment without success may become candidates for GIFT, ZIFT, or
                                   TET procedures. Ovarian follicles are stimulated to grow with the help of gonadotropins. These follicles are then
                                   punctured with a needle transvaginally to “harvest” the eggs. These eggs can be mixed with semen and placed
                                   directly into the distal end of the fallopian tube (GIFT) using laparoscopic techniques and a small tubal catheter
                                   (see Laparoscopy, p. 862). In the ZIFT and TET procedures, the semen and eggs are allowed to incubate 1–2
                                   days in vitro; embryos form and are transferred to the fallopian tubes in a manner similar to the GIFT proce-
                                   dure. Most patients undergoing ART procedures utilize conventional in vitro fertilization (IVF) and do not need
                                   laparoscopy.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Infertility; history of multiple spontaneous abortion and preterm labor

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                   (For summaries of specific procedures, see Laparoscopy, p. 862; Hysteroscopy, p. 807; or Pelvic Laparotomy,
                                   p. 811.)

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Age range               18–50 yr

                                    Incidence
            Surgery

                                                            1/20 women

                                    Etiology                PID; endometriosis; idiopathic

                                    Associated              Obesity
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   (Procedures covered: pelvic laparotomy for myomectomy; ovarian cystectomy; oophorectomy; ectopic
                                   pregnancy removal; abdominal colpopexy; Moschowitz enterocele repair; presacral neurectomy; infertility
                                   operations)

                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   This is generally a healthy patient population; however, this procedure can be performed for a wide variety of patho-
                                   logic conditions.

                                   Cardiovascular           Patients undergoing myomectomy and, especially, ectopic pregnancy removal may have
                                                            had a significant amount of preop bleeding; therefore, assess for hypovolemia. Preexisting
                                                            comorbidities and preop status will vary considerably. Assess as appropriate.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Laboratory               Hb/Hct. Consider T&S/T&cross. Patients with ectopic pregnancy may have urine/serum
                                                            pregnancy tests, as well as pelvic ultrasound.

                                   Premedication            Patients with ruptured ectopic pregnancies may come to the OR urgently and should be
                                                            treated with full stomach precautions.

===== PAGE 817 =====
Infertility Operations/Assisted Reproductive Technologies      817

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GETA is indicated for patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery and in patients present-
                   ing for emergency surgery. Regional anesthesia is best avoided in hemodynamically unstable patients (i.e., ectopic
                   pregnancies) and for laparoscopy where breathing difficulty may develop 2° to pneumoperitoneum and Trendelen-
                   burg position. Regional anesthesia may be suitable for simple pelvic laparotomies. In the younger patient popula-
                   tion, spinal anesthesia is less desirable because of an increased incidence of postdural puncture headache (PDPH).
                   If spinal anesthesia is indicated, a pencil-point needle (e.g., Whitacre, Sprotte) should be used to decrease the
                   incidence of PDPH.

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction               Standard induction (see p. B-2) In a patient with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy, bleeding
                                            and hemodynamic instability, consider ketamine 1–2 mg/kg or etomidate 0.1–0.4 mg/
                                            kg. These patients are generally considered unfasted and would require rapid-sequence
                                            induction (see p. B-5). Use OGT/NGT to decompress stomach after induction for lapa-
                                            roscopic surgery

                    Maintenance             Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Consider PONV prophylaxis.

                    Emergence               Standard emergence

                   Regional anesthesia: A T4-6 sensory level is recommended for pelvic/lower abdominal surgery.

                    Spinal                  0.75% bupivacaine 12–14 mg in 8.25% dextrose. (See Anesthetic Considerations for
                                            Cesarean Section, p. 835.) + 10–20 fentanyl ± 0.1–0.2 mg morphine.

                                                                                                                                                Obstetric/Gynecologic
                    Epidural +              1.5–2.0% lidocaine with epinephrine 5 mcg/mL, 15–20 mL; redose with 3–5 mL as

                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                      Narcotic              needed. Provide supplemental iv sedation. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean
                                            Section, p. 835.)

                    CSE                     Combined spinal/epidural (CSE): An alternative technique combining the rapid onset
                                            and density of spinal anesthesia with the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthe-
                                            sia. Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position patient as for spinal or epidural.
                                            The most common technique is the needle-through-needle. After the epidural space
                                            is located with a standard 17-ga Tuohy needle, insert a 4” 26- to 27-ga pencil-point
                                            spinal needle through it to administer 12–14 mL of spinal bupivacaine (0.75%) ± fen-
                                            tanyl 10–20 mcg ± morphine sulfate 0.1–0.2 mg. Secure the epidural catheter and use if
                                            needed (a test dose is advisable).

                    Blood and fluid         Blood loss will vary by procedure. Generally limited unless ruptured ectopic pregnancy
                       requirements         or vascular complication of laparoscopy.
                                            IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2
                                            NS/LR at 4–7 mL/kg/h

                    Control of blood        Epinephrine                           During myomectomies, surgeons may inject vaso-
                      loss                  Vasopressin                           pressors into the area surrounding myomata prior
                                                                                  to excision. This may cause HTN ↑ HR (epic) or
                                                                                  ↓ HR (vasopressin).

                    Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1)        Patients with ectopic pregnancies may need intra-
                                            ± Foley catheter                      arterial monitoring if major hemorrhage occurs.
                                            ± Arterial catheter

                    Positioning             3and pad pressure points              During abdominal colpopexy, patient is placed
                                            3eyes                                 intermittently in both the lithotomy and supine
                                                                                  positions. (See p. 805 for concerns regarding the
                                                                                  lithotomy position.)

===== PAGE 818 =====
818   c h a p t e r 8.2     Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Complications             Pneumoperitoneum                         Pneumoperitoneum with CO2 insulfflation and
                                                             ↑ PaCO2, ↓ PaO2                          steep Trendelenburg position cause cephalad dis-
                                                             ETT migration                            placement of diaphragm with ↓ FRC, ↓ pulmo-
                                                                                                      nary compliance, and ↑ airway closure/atelectasis.
                                                                                                      Hypercarbia and hypoxia, due to respiratory com-
                                                                                                      promise, can result unless ventilation is controlled
                                                                                                      during GA. Check for endobronchial migration of
                                                                                                      ETT upon assumption of Trendelenburg position.
                                                             Pneumothorax                             Pneumothorax due to retroperitoneal dissec-
                                                                                                      tion of insufflated gas into the mediastinum can
                                                                                                      cause hypoxemia, ↑ airway pressure, subcutaneous
                                                                                                      emphysema, and ↓ BP.
                                                             ↓BP                                      ↓ BP can result from ↓ venous return caused by
                                                                                                      pneumoperitoneum.
                                                             Hemorrhage                               Hypotension may result from hemorrhage or rapid
                                                             Dysrhythmias                             reversal of head-down position.
                                                             Peripheral nerve injury
                                                             Venous CO2 embolism                      Unintended intravascular injection of CO2 gas can
                                                                                                      → ↓ BP and dysrhythmias.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications             PONV (see p. B-6)
                                                             Anemia
                                                             Shoulder pain
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Pain                      PCA (see p. C-3)
            Surgery

                                     management

                                   Tests                     Hb/Hct if hemorrhage occurs.

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ASSISTED
                                        REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES (ART)
                                        PREOPERATIVE
                                   This is generally a fit, healthy patient population. Little is required beyond routine tests, unless otherwise indicated.

                                   Laboratory                Tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication             Standard premedication (see p. B-1).

                                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: Conscious sedation, local anesthesia, regional (e.g., spinal and epidural) and GA all have
                                   been employed for ART. The standard in vitro fertilization (IVF) technique consists of transvaginal egg retrieval
                                   and embryo transfer (not laparoscopic technique), and one study suggests higher pregnancy and delivery rates if
                                   iv sedation or epidural anesthesia is used as opposed to GA. Laparoscopy is only performed for GIFT, ZIFT, or
                                   TET, but not for in vitro fertilization. For TVOR, use moderate → heavy iv sedation. For laparoscopic procedures,
                                   breathing difficulty can develop due to pneumoperitoneum and Trendelenburg position. Therefore, GETA with
                                   controlled ventilation is most commonly used. No difference in pregnancy rates with the use of isoflurane, propo-
                                   fol, N2O, or midazolam has been demonstrated.

===== PAGE 819 =====
Infertility Operations/Assisted Reproductive Technologies                  819

                    Induction                   Standard induction (see p. B-2). Avoidance of succinylcholine may decrease postop myalgia.

                    Maintenance                 Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). N2O does not appear to adversely affect success of
                                                fertilization.

                    Emergence                   No special considerations

                    Blood and fluid             Minimal blood loss                            Blood loss minimal, unless trauma to vasculature.
                       requirements             IV: 18 ga × 1                                 Rarely, trauma to blood vessels or organs following
                                                NS/LR at 2 mL/kg/h                            laparoscopy may necessitate laparotomy.

                    Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                    Positioning                 3and pad pressure points
                                                3eyes

                    Complications               Ventilatory                                   Pneumoperitoneum with CO2 and steep Tren-
                                                                                              delenburg position cause cephalad displacement
                                                                                              of diaphragm with ↓ FRC, ↓ pulmonary compli-
                                                                                              ance, and ↑ airway closure/atelectasis. Hypercar-
                                                                                              bia and hypoxia, due to respiratory compromise,
                                                                                              can result unless ventilation is controlled during
                                                                                              GA. Check for endobronchial migration of ETT
                                                                                              upon assumption of Trendelenburg position.
                                                Pneumothorax                                  Pneumothorax due to retroperitoneal dissection
                                                                                              of insufflated gas into the mediastinum can cause
                                                                                              hypoxemia, ↑ airway pressure, subcutaneous emphy-
                                                                                              sema and ↓ BP.

                                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                Cardiovascular                                ↓ BP may result from ↓ venous return 2° pneumo-
                                                                                              peritoneum.

                                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                                                Hemorrhage                                    Hemorrhage may result from blood vessel injury or
                                                                                              rapid reversal of head-down position.
                                                Venous CO2 embolism                           Unintended intravascular injection of CO2 gas →
                                                Dysrhythmias                                  ↓ BP and dysrhythmias.
                                                Nerve injury                                  Use of Trendelenburg position incurs risk of nerve
                                                Bowel injury                                  injury. Hyperextension of arm may result in bra-
                                                                                              chial plexus injury, and careful padding of vulner-
                                                                                              able points is necessary.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications               Shoulder pain                                 Postop pain may be referred to the shoulder, due to
                                                                                              irritation of diaphragm by residual pneumoperito-
                                                                                              neum or bleeding.

                    Pain                        Oral analgesics are usually                   (NSAIDS) or Acetaminophen
                      management                sufficient.

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Beilin Y, Bodian C, Eisenkraft J, et al: The use of propofol, nitrous oxide, or isoflurane does not affect the reproductive success
                        rate following gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT). Anesthesiology 1999; 90:36–41.
                     2. Burney RO, Schust DJ, Yao MW: Infertility: In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams
                        & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 1185–276.
                     3. Gonen O, Shulman A, Ghetler Y, et al: The impact of different types of anesthesia or in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer
                        treatment outcome. J Assist Reprod Genet 1995; 12(10):678–82.
                     4. Meniru GI: Cambridge Guide to Infertility Management and Assisted Reproduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge:
                        2001, 130–1.

===== PAGE 820 =====
820   c h a p t e r 8.2     Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                     5. Rock JA, Jones HW, eds: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia: 2008.
                                     6. Tanbo T: Assisted fertilization in infertile women with patent tubes: a comparison of in vitro fertilization, gamete intra-
                                        fallopian transfer and tubal embryo stage transfer. Hum Reprod 1990; 5:266–70.

                                   HYSTERECTOMY—VAGINAL, ABDOMINAL,
                                   LAPAROSCOPIC OR ROBOTIC
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Hysterectomy is one of the most commonly performed operations in the United States (650,000/year).
                                   Several approaches are possible: vaginal, abdominal, laparoscopic, and robotic. The vaginal approach, performed
                                   with the patient in a dorsal lithotomy position, is preferred because it offers significantly less morbidity and mortal-
                                   ity. Use of the vaginal approach may be limited by such factors as the pelvic bony architecture, excessive uterine size,
                                   pelvic adhesions, or the presence of gynecological cancers, thus requiring an abdominal or laparoscopic/robotic
                                   approach. The approach may be changed in the OR, where a pelvic examination under anesthesia will determine
                                   the true uterine size, degree of prolapse, and the presence of pelvic pathology. More recently, minimally invasive
                                   approaches with laparoscopy and robotic surgery have allowed for decreased morbidity and recovery time when
                                   compared to an abdominal approach. For a total laparoscopic, laparoscopic-assisted, or robotic-assisted hyster-
                                   ectomy patients are placed in a low lithotomy position, and abdominal entry is confirmed with the laparoscope once
                                   the abdomen has been insufflated. The procedural steps are identical to the abdominal approach. For a laparoscopic
                                   or robotic-assisted hysterectomy, the patient is placed in a steep Trendelenburg. Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is the
                                   most frequent preop diagnosis in patients having a vaginal hysterectomy. POP includes one or more of the following:
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   prolapse of the uterus; intestine into the pouch of Douglas (enterocele); bladder into the anterior vaginal wall (cys-
                                   tocele); urethra into the anterior vaginal wall (urethrocele); and rectum into the posterior vaginal wall (rectocele). In
            Surgery

                                   these cases, the hysterectomy is often accompanied by an anterior/posterior colporrhaphy, vault suspension, and
                                   perineoplasty.
                                   Variant approaches: Abdominal hysterectomy is performed through a Pfannenstiel or midline incision, depend-
                                   ing on the uterine size and the need to perform a lymph node dissection for cancer. A Pfannenstiel incision often can
                                   be extended with two types of muscle-splitting steps: the Maylard, in which the rectus muscles are cut, or a Cherney
                                   rectus muscle detachment performed at the pubic insertion. After entering the abdomen, a self-retaining retractor
                                   is placed, and the round, ovarian, and broad ligaments are clamped, cut, and tied, in that order. The uterine vessels
                                   are identified and ligated, and, finally, the cutting and ligation of the uterosacral and cardinal ligaments. The vagina is
                                   entered and the cervix removed. Then the vaginal cuff is closed in a way that incorporates the uterosacral ligaments
                                   for support. The visceral peritoneum is reapproximated, the retractors removed, and the abdominal layers closed.
                                   During a supracervical hysterectomy, the uterine corpus is detached from the cervix and the vagina is not entered.
                                   In a vaginal hysterectomy, the cervix is retracted, a paracervical incision is made, and the anterior and posterior
                                   cul-de-sacs are entered (Fig. 8.2-4). The uterosacral and cardinal ligaments and the uterine vessels are cut and ligated.
                                   With steady downward traction, the broad ligament is ligated in a stepwise manner until either the ovarian or infun-
                                   dibulopelvic ligament is reached, and one of the two is ligated, depending on whether the ovaries are to be removed or
                                   not. After the uterus has been removed, followed by closure of the vaginal cuff, which often includes the uterosacral
                                   and cardinal ligaments for support. A vaginal pack often is left in place. Laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy
                                   (LAVH) is sometimes performed to facilitate bilateral salpino-oopherectomy (BSO) by ensuring good visualization
                                   of the infundibulopelvic and uterine-ovarian ligaments as well as ovarian vessels. Once the abdomen is entered, the
                                   ureters are identified as they cross the iliac vessels at the level of the pelvic brim. The infundibulopelvic ligaments with
                                   their corresponding ovarian vessels are then coagulated and cut followed by the broad ligaments and uterine vessels.
                                   Attention is then paid to the vagina, where the remaining portion of the procedure is performed through the vaginal
                                   approach. Once the vaginal cuff is closed, and pneumoperitoneum achieved, the surgeon can look into the abdomen
                                   through the laparoscope to ensure hemostasis at the end of the case. The procedure for laparoscopic or robotic supra-
                                   cervical hysterectomies is similar, the primary difference is that the uterus is removed through the abdominal incisions
                                   with the help of an uterine morcellator.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Uterine myoma; pelvic organ prolapse; pelvic pain 2° endometriosis or adhesions; uncon-
                                   trolled uterine bleeding/dysmenorrhea; endometrial hyperplasia; gynecological cancers; pelvic masses

===== PAGE 821 =====
Hysterectomy—Vaginal, Abdominal, Laparoscopic or Robotic             821

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                                Figure 8.2-4. Surgical anatomy for vaginal hysterectomy. (Reproduced with permission
                                from Rock JA, Thompson JD, eds: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 8th edition. Lippincott
                                Williams & Wilkins: 1997.)

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                             Abdominal Approach                         Vaginal Approach

                     Position                Supine                                     Lithotomy. Following induction, position patient so
                                                                                        that the perineum is at the end of operating table
                                                                                        to ensure optimum surgical exposure.

                     Incision                Pfannenstiel or low midline. The Pfan-     Pericervical vaginal
                                             nenstiel incision can be extended with a
                                             Maylard muscle-splitting procedure or a
                                             Cherney rectus muscle detachment at
                                             pubic insertion.

                     Special                 None                                       Stirrups
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  None                                       To prevent peroneal nerve injury, the area of leg
                       considerations                                                   leaning against stirrup should be well cushioned.
                                                                                        Often, vasoconstriction agents (1:200,000 epi-
                                                                                        nephrine and vasopressin) are used to cut down
                                                                                        perioperative vaginal cuff bleeding.

===== PAGE 822 =====
822   c h a p t e r 8.2   Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDUREs (cont’d)
                                                           Abdominal Approach                           Vaginal Approach

                                    Antibiotics            1–2 g cefoxitin or cefotetan + clindamycin   ⇐
                                                           600 mg iv

                                    Surgical time          1–2 h                                        45 min–1.5 h

                                    EBL                    200–300 mL                                   100–200 mL

                                    Postop care            PACU                                         ⇐

                                    Mortality              Overall (10,000 patients): 14.6              20
                                                           < 25 yr: 8.9                                 0
                                                           25–34 yr: 4.7                                0.9
                                                           35–44 yr: 3.8                                0.5
                                                           45–54 yr: 6.5                                2.7
                                                           55–64 yr: 41.3                               1.9
                                                           65–74 yr: 93.0                               18.3
                                                           > 75 yr: 255.8                               56.8

                                    Morbidity              Infection:                                   ⇐
                                                              Unexplained fever: 10–20%                 5–8%
                                                              Pelvic infection: 3.2–10%                 3.9–10%
                                                              Wound infection: 4–8%                     –
                                                              Urinary tract: 1.1–5%                     1.7–5%
                                                           Femoral nerve injury: 11.6%                  –
                                                           Hemorrhage:                                  ⇐
                                                              Intraop: 1–2%                             0.7–2–5%
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                              Requiring transfusion: 2–12%              2–8.3%
                                                           Unintended major procedures: 1.7%            5.1%
            Surgery

                                                           Injury:                                      ⇐
                                                              Bladder: 1–2%                             0.5–1.5%
                                                              Bowel: 0.1–0.5%                           0.1–0.8%
                                                              Ureter: 0.1–0.5%                          0.05–0.1%
                                                              Vesicovaginal fistula: 0.1–0.2%           ⇐
                                                           Thromboembolic events: 0.4–1.3%              0.62–1.7%

                                    Pain score             5–8                                          4–6

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              30–80 yr

                                    Incidence              > 1/5 females; 650,000/yr in the United States.

                                    Etiology               Uterine myomata; endometriosis; uterine prolapse; uterine cancer; pelvic mass.

                                    Associated             Stress urinary incontinence; obesity
                                      conditions

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Although many patients presenting for this procedure are otherwise healthy, others may have advanced cancer.

                                   Respiratory              CXR may be indicated to r/o pleural effusion or other lung pathology in cancer patients.
                                                            In addition, ABG, ± PFTs, may be indicated preop in patients with significant pulmonary
                                                            involvement.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 823 =====
Hysterectomy—Vaginal, Abdominal, Laparoscopic or Robotic              823

                    Cardiovascular           Patient may have blood loss from the primary problem. Bowel prep may cause dehydra-
                                             tion and electrolyte abnormalities.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Hematologic              Hb/Hct. Consider T&S/T&cross.

                    Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: GA is commonly used; however, spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural (CSE)
                   anesthesia is appropriate for adequately hydrated patients who are undergoing simple hysterectomy through a Pfan-
                    nenstiel incision or vaginal hysterectomy. If spinal anesthetic is indicated, a pencil-point needle (e.g., Sprotte or
                    Whitacre) should be used to decrease the incidence of PDPH.

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation is necessary if the procedure is per-
                                             formed abdominally. These patients have a high incidence of PONV; consider prophylaxis
                                             (see p. B-6).

                    Emergence                Standard emergence

                                                                                                                                                    Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Regional anesthesia: A T4-6 sensory level is sufficient to provide anesthesia for procedures on the uterus.

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                    Spinal                   0.75% bupivacaine 10–15 mg in 8.25% dextrose ± fentanyl 10–20 mcg; ± morphine
                                             0.1–0.2 mcg. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean Section, p. 835) Supplement
                                             with iv sedation.

                    Epidural                 1.5–2.0% lidocaine with epinephrine 5 mcg/mL (1:200,000), 15–20 mL; supplement with
                                             3–5 mL as needed. Supplemental iv sedation. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean
                                             Section, p. 835.) Supplement with iv sedation.

                    CSE                      Combined spinal/epidural (CSE): An alternative technique combining the rapid onset
                                             and density of spinal anesthesia with the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia.
                                             Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position patient as for spinal or epidural. The most
                                             common technique is the needle-through-needle. After the epidural space is located with
                                             a standard 17-ga Tuohy needle, insert a 4” 26- to 27-ga pencil-point spinal needle through
                                             it to administer 0.6 mL of spinal bupivacaine (0.75%) ± fentanyl 10 mcg ± morphine sulfate
                                             0.1–0.2 mg. Secure the epidural catheter and use if needed (a test dose is advisable).

                    Blood and fluid          Consider ↑ blood loss in cancer patients,
                       requirements          prior XRT, prior abdominal surgery.
                                             IV: 18 ga × 1–2
                                             Warm fluids
                                             Type & screen/cross patients at ↑ risk of
                                             bleeding

                    Control of blood         Vaginal, laparoscopic, and robotic hysterectomy:
                      loss                   Minimal blood loss
                                             NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h
                                             Abdominal hysterectomy:
                                             Moderate-to-heavy blood loss
                                             NS/LR at 4–5 mL/kg/h

===== PAGE 824 =====
824   c h a p t e r 8.2      Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Monitoring                  Vaginal hysterectomy:
                                                               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                               ± Foley catheter
                                                               Abdominal hysterectomy:
                                                               Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                               Foley catheter
                                                               ± Arterial line                              Consider in patients with anticipated ↑ blood loss
                                                               ± CVP line                                   or major medical comorbidities.

                                   Positioning                 3and pad pressure points                     The lithotomy position has several considerations
                                                               Shoulder abduction < 90°                     for safety. (See p. 805 for details.)

                                   Complications               Vaginal hysterectomy:                        Vagal stimulation and ↓↓ HR may occur with
                                                               Cervical stimulation                         cervical/peritoneal manipulation.   Surgeon may
                                                               Epinephrine/vasopressin injection            inject epinephrine or vasopressin to decrease local
                                                               Abdominal hysterectomy:                      bleeding → HTN and brady or tachydysrhythmias.
                                                               Blood loss
                                                               Epinephrine/vasopressin injection

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               PONV (see p. B-6).
                                                               VTE (see p. B-8).
                                                               Anemia

                                   Pain                        Epidural opiates (p. C-3)                  If catheter to be used postop.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                     management                PCA (p. C-3)
            Surgery

                                   Tests                       Hct
                                                               CXR (if CVP catheter placed                CXR to evaluate central line placement and rule
                                                               intraop)                                   out pneumothorax.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Carley ME, McIntire D, Carley JM, et al: Incidence, risk factors and morbidity of unintended bladder or ureter injury during
                                        hysterectomy. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2002; 13(1):18–21.
                                     2. Clough TF: Perioperative morbidity of hysterectomy for benign gynaecological disease. J Obstet Gynaecol 2001; 21(5):504–6.
                                     3. Davies A, Hart R, Magos A, et al: Hysterectomy: surgical route and complications. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2002;
                                        104(2):148–51.
                                     4. Howard FM, Koval SR, Jones HW: Hysterectomy. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition.
                                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2008, 721–73.
                                     5. Stovall TG: Hysterectomy. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
                                        Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.

                                   OPERATIONS FOR PELVIC ORGAN PROLAPSE: ANTERIOR
                                   AND POSTERIOR COLPORRhAPHY, ENTEROCELE
                                   REPAIR, SACROSPINOUS LIGAMENT VAGINAL VAULT
                                   SUSPENSION, UTEROSACRAL LIGAMENT VAGINAL VAULT
                                   SUSPENSION, SACROCOLPOPEXY
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Pelvic organ prolapse often includes coexisting anatomical hernias that can be reported as symp-
                                   tomatic vaginal pressure or bulges (e.g., enterocele [Fig. 8.2-5C] and uterine prolapse). Cystocele (Fig. 8.2-5A) and

===== PAGE 825 =====
Operations for Pelvic Organ Prolapse        825

                                                                                                       A

                                                                                                        B

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                                                                                                        C

                               Figure 8.2-5. A: Anatomy of cystocele. B: Anatomy of rectocele. C: Anatomy of
                               enterocele. (Reproduced with permission from Pernoll ML, ed: Current Obstetrics and
                               Gynecological Diagnosis and Treatment. Appleton & Lange: 1991.)

                   rectocele (Fig. 8.2-5B) are prolapses (relaxations) of the anterior and posterior vaginal wall, respectively. Cystoceles
                   are often symptomatic due to bladder protrusion past the introitus during straining. Often this relaxation will allow
                   the bladder neck to lose its important anatomical relationship to the urethra and the rest of the bladder. The r esult
                   can be bothersome stress urinary incontinence and/or incomplete emptying for the patient (see Operations for Stress

===== PAGE 826 =====
826   c h a p t e r 8.2     Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Urinary Incontinence, p. 828). The rectocele often is experienced as a vaginal bulge during straining and tends to
                                   cause incomplete evacuation of stool. The goal of the colporrhaphy is to restore the original anatomy. Due to the
                                   frequent coexisting relaxations, a posterior colporrhaphy (vaginal repair), enterocele repair, and vaginal hyster-
                                   ectomy are frequently performed at the same time.
                                   In an anterior colporrhaphy, the patient is placed in a high-dorsal lithotomy position with the perineum at the end
                                   of the operating table for surgical access. The bladder is emptied, and a weighted speculum is inserted into the vagina.
                                   A vaginal hysterectomy is performed at this point, if indicated (see Vaginal Hysterectomy, p. 820). The extent of the
                                   urethrocystocele is determined manually, and the vaginal mucosa is grasped at its cephalic border with two clamps.
                                   From this point to the external urethral meatus, the mucosa is undermined with a vasoconstrictive solution epineph-
                                   rine (5–10 mL, 1:200,000), phenylephrine (1:200,000), or vasopressin (1–5 U/10 mL NS). This decreases blood loss
                                   significantly and helps to determine the depth of the vaginal mucosa. The mucosa is cut over this undermined area
                                   and, with the help of sharp and blunt dissection, the mucosa is dissected laterally from its underlying fascia. A series
                                   of fascial plication sutures are placed to reduce the cystourethrocele. The redundant mucosa is excised and the edges
                                   are reapproximated.
                                   Paravaginal repair is another procedure for repair of cystocele and can be performed via the abdomen or the v agina.
                                   The space between the bladder and pubic bone is entered, and the bladder is dissected off the pelvic sidewall, tak-
                                   ing care to avoid injury to the obturator nerve and vessels. The arcus tendineus fascia pelvis is visualized, running
                                   from the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis posteriorly to the ischial spine. The surgeon places a hand in the
                                   vagina to elevate the lateral vaginal sulcus to the arcus tendineus fascia. Multiple fine sutures are placed to secure the
                                   paravaginal tissues to the arcus tendineus fascia pelvis. The same is done for the opposite pelvic sidewall if bilateral
                                   defects are present.
                                   If necessary, a posterior colporrhaphy may be performed. A small portion of perineum posterior to the introi-
                                   tus is removed initially. The vaginal mucosa over the rectocele is undermined with vasoconstrictor fluid prior to
                                   incision, followed by dissection of the overlying mucosa in a manner nearly identical to anterior colporrhaphy.
                                   One or several layers of stitches are placed to plicate the pararectal fascia, allowing for reduction of the rectocele.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Redundant mucosa is excised, and the edges are reapproximated. A vaginal pack is usually placed to minimize
                                   bleeding.
            Surgery

                                   An enterocele often is first noticed during a posterior colporrhaphy procedure and is repaired during the poste-
                                   rior repair. The enterocele is well identified and dissected away from the surrounding tissue. Two or more parallel
                                   purse-string stitches are used to close the enterocele. The enterocele tissue distal to the purse-string closure is
                                   excised. To reduce the enterocele in an optimal fashion, intraabdominal pressure has to be at a minimum.
                                   Abdominal approach: An abdominal sacrocolpopexy or sacrocervicopexy can be performed for vaginal vault
                                   or cervical stump prolapse. This procedure can be performed through a Pfannenstiel or midline incision or via the
                                   laparoscopic/robotic approach. After entering the abdomen a self-retaining retractor is used to retract the bowels.
                                   The peritoneum over the sacral promontory is carefully incised longitudinally, and the sacral promontory is exposed.
                                   The peritoneum is opened along the right pararectal space down to the right uterosacral ligament and to the vaginal
                                   cuff or cervical stump (cervicopexy). Careful attention is paid to visualization of the right ureter. An EEA sizer is
                                   introduced into the vagina, and the peritoneum is dissected off the anterior and posterior vagina. The bladder and
                                   rectum are also dissected from the vaginal vault. A “Y” shaped polypropylene mesh graft is then introduced into the
                                   abdomen. One end of the mesh is attached to the vaginal cuff (cervix), and the opposite end attached to the sacral
                                   promontory, thereby elevating the vaginal apex. The peritoneum is then closed over the mesh.
                                   During laparoscopy or a robotic-assisted abdominal sacrocolpopexy or cervicopexy the patient is placed in
                                   steep Trendelenburg to aid in bowel retraction. The procedure is performed in the same fashion as an abdomi-
                                   nal sacrocolpopexy. Cystourethroscopy is performed after the procedure to ensure ureteral and bladder integrity.
                                   A midurethral urinary incontinence sling is often performed after completion of the sacrocolpopexy to prevent
                                   stress urinary incontinence.
                                   Variant procedure or approaches: Vaginal sacrospinous ligament suspension is an alternative to sacrocol-
                                   popexy. The patient is placed in a dorsal lithotomy position, and an examination under anesthesia is performed. A
                                   vasoconstrictive solution is injected (usually epinephrine 3–5 mL, 1:200,000) in the posterior vaginal wall. A vertical
                                   incision is made, and the mucosa is bluntly dissected off the rectum in an anterolateral direction. An enterocele, if
                                   found, is repaired at this time. The pararectal tissue is then bluntly pierced to enter the pararectal space. The anatomy
                                   surrounding the sacrospinous ligament is well palpated and, with the help of the special Miya hook, a large suture

===== PAGE 827 =====
Operations for Pelvic Organ Prolapse        827

                   is placed into the sacrospinous ligament. The other end of the suture is placed at the apex of the vagina, which, after
                   tying, is pulled in a lateral cephalad direction. The mucosa is finally closed.
                   Uterosacral ligament suspension, or high McCall’s culdoplasty, is an alternate procedure for vaginal apex sup-
                   port. After the uterus is removed by a vaginal hysterectomy, the uterosacral ligaments are identified. Two separate
                   permanent sutures are placed along the uterosacral ligament as far cephalad (toward the sacrum) as possible. The
                   same is done on the opposite side. An additional stitch of absorbable suture is placed at the vaginal corners bilaterally
                   and carried through the uterosacral ligaments as well. A cystoscopy is then carried out with all four stitches placed
                   on tension to r/o ureteral obstruction due to ligation or kinking of the ureters. The stitches are replaced if obstruc-
                   tion is observed. After ureteral patency has been confirmed, these stitches are sutured to the fibromuscular layer of
                   the vaginal cuff and tied to bring the apex as cephalad as possible. The vaginal cuff is closed with absorbable sutures.
                   The Le Fort procedure, colpectomy and colpocleisis, are highly efficacious, minimally invasive operations per-
                   formed in women with complete prolapse of the uterus and/or vagina, respectively, who do not desire to remain
                   sexually active. With the patient in a dorsal lithotomy position, the anterior and posterior vaginal mucosa are dis-
                   sected from the underlying fascia, and then the anterior and posterior vaginal fascia are plicated together, resulting
                   in near-complete closure of the vagina. Advantages of these techniques are that they can be performed rapidly, they
                   do not require general anesthesia, and most patients can be discharged from the hospital the following day. Closure
                   procedures are ideal for patients who are elderly and/or have multiple medical conditions that make more invasive
                   surgery risky.
                   Use of vaginal mesh kits: Vaginal mesh kits are currently available for the treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. Some
                   systems treat anterior vaginal wall and apical prolapse, whereas others (used less commonly) treat posterior vaginal
                   wall prolapse. Similar to a cystocele repair (for an anterior mesh kit), the vaginal mucosa is hydrodissected with a va-
                   soconstrictive solution. The vaginal mucosa is sharply dissected from the underlying bladder to the levator muscles bi-
                   laterally. Two tunnels are gently created for palpation of the sacrospinous ligament bilaterally. The graft is trimmed to
                   the appropriate size based on the patient’s prolapse. The distal mesh arms, if present, are introduced into the obturator
                   internus muscles. The proximal arms are introduced into the sacrospinous ligaments. Careful attention is paid to avoid

                                                                                                                                                         Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   the pudendal neurovascular bundies. The vaginal apex (or cervix if the uterus is present) is then attached to cephalad
                   edge of the graft and the upper arms of the graft are pulled through the sacrospinous ligaments, thereby elevating the

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                   vaginal apex. The anterior vaginal mucosa is closed in a full-thickness manner with absorbable suture over the graft.
                   Cystourethroscopy is performed after the procedure to ensure ureteral and bladder integrity.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Symptomatic cystocele; symptomatic uterine prolapse; enterocele; rectocele

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Dorsal lithotomy

                     Incision                Vaginal mucosal; peritoneum for enterocele repair

                     Unique                  To prevent peroneal nerve injury, the area of the leg leaning against the stirrup should be well
                       considerations        cushioned. Putting the legs in a high position increases venous return to the heart. Infiltration
                                             with epinephrine and vasopressin often is used to reduce intraop bleeding. This causes changes
                                             in CO, HR, and BP. Low intraabdominal pressure (good muscle relaxation) is needed during the
                                             enterocele reduction.

                     Antibiotics             Cefoxitin or cefotetan 1–2 g iv

                     Surgical time           45 min (anterior colporrhaphy)
                                             30 min (posterior colporrhaphy/enterocele repair)
                                             45 min (uterosacral ligament suspension)
                                             1 h (paravaginal repair)

                     Closing                 Suprapubic catheter (anterior colporrhaphy); vaginal pack (enterocele repair)
                       considerations

                     EBL                     20–500 mL

                     Postop care             PACU

                     Mortality               1%

===== PAGE 828 =====
828   c h a p t e r 8.2      Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                                    Morbidity                 Anterior colporrhaphy                            Vaginal sacrospinous suspension (Miya hook)
                                                              Delayed voiding 1–7 d: 30%                       Bleeding in gluteal and pudendal vessels
                                                              Foul vaginal discharge: 14%                      Pararectal burning pain × 2 mo
                                                              Bacteriuria: 13%                                 Sciatic pain (indicating misplaced sutures, which
                                                              Pyrexia (>100.4° F): 11%                         must be removed)
                                                              Atelectasis: 3%                                  Peritoneal tear (during Miya hook insertion)
                                                              Delayed voiding > 7 d: 0.6%
                                                              Need for blood transfusion: 0.6%                 Paravaginal repair
                                                              Urethrovaginal fistula: 0.4%                     Obturator vessel laceration
                                                              Acute gastric dilatation: 0.2%                   Obturator nerve injury
                                                                                                               Ureteral obstruction
                                                              Uterosacral ligament suspension                  Bladder laceration
                                                              Ureteral obstruction
                                                              Perirectal abscess due to stitch in rectum

                                    Pain score                5–8

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range                 40–80 yr

                                    Incidence                 > 1/5 women

                                    Etiology                  Multiparous state; obesity; chronic cough; previous pelvic surgery

                                    Associated                Pelvic relaxation syndrome
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                      conditions
            Surgery

                                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Operations for Stress Urinary Incontinence, p. 831.
                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Richter HE, Varner RE: Pelvic organ prolapse. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams
                                        & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.
                                     2. Zimmerman CS, Shull B, Yandell PM, Thomas JM, Leeman SD, Karrem MM: Surgery for correction of defects in pelvic
                                        support and pelvic fistulas. In: Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Lippincott Williams &
                                        Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 854–934.

                                   OPERATIONS FOR STRESS URINARY INCONTINENCE
                                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Stress urinary incontinence is a common condition affecting mostly older and multiparous women.
                                   It is a disorder of the musculofascial support to the bladder neck, urethra, and pelvic floor. Many of these patients
                                   have had extensive preop workup to exclude urge or other types of urinary incontinence and many have been
                                   treated with pelvic floor exercises (Kegel) prior to surgery. Many surgical approaches exist: abdominal suspension
                                   procedures, suburethral slings, and transurethral injections of bulking agents. Evidence suggests that midure-
                                   thral slings are the most successful procedures. Given that they can be performed with regional or even local
                                   anesthesia as outpatient procedures, midurethral slings are the most commonly used procedures to treat stress
                                   urinary incontinence. Bladder neck slings and injection of urethral bulking agents can also be used for those with
                                   contraindication to a midurethral sling. Patient positioning is crucial for all vaginal surgery.

===== PAGE 829 =====
Operations for Stress Urinary Incontinence         829

                   Vaginal approaches: The Kelly urethral plication was historically used as the primary surgical treatment, espe-
                   cially when other vaginal surgery is to be performed. The patient initially is placed in a high-dorsal lithotomy position
                   with the perineum at the end of the operating table for surgical exposure. The bladder is emptied, and a weighted
                   speculum is inserted into the vagina. The extent of the cystourethrocele is determined and the vaginal mucosa is
                   grasped at its cephalad border with two clamps. From this point to the external urethral meatus, the mucosa usu-
                   ally is undermined with 5–10 mL of a vasoconstrictive solution (epinephrine 1:200,000, phenylephrine 1:200,000,
                   or vasopressin 1–5 U/10 mL NS). This decreases blood loss significantly and helps to determine the depth of the
                   mucosa. With the help of sharp and blunt dissection, the mucosa is freed laterally from its underlying adherent fas-
                    cia. A series of vertical mattress sutures are placed in the mobilized paraurethral and paravesical fascia to reduce the
                    cystourethrocele and elevate the posterior urethra to a high-retropubic position. The redundant mucosa is excised
                    and the edges are reapproximated. A suprapubic catheter is often inserted at the end of the surgery to prevent blad-
                    der overdistention. The Kelley urethral plication is rarely performed in modern practice and has been supplanted by
                    the midurethral sling.
                   Two anterior bladder neck suspension techniques—Stamey and modified Pereyra—are very similar procedures
                   wherein the vaginal mucosa is incised and dissected off the underlying paraurethral fascia, much the same way as
                   in the Kelly plication. Instead of using a layer of mattress sutures, both suspension methods use two lateral sutures
                   that suspend the vesical neck on each side (see Fig. 9-21, p. 919). The ends of the sutures are tied over the rectus
                   fascia to provide support. The Stamey method uses a small Dacron cuff to prevent the suture from tearing through
                   the paravesical fascia, whereas in the modified Pereyra method, the posterior loop is attached firmly to the puboure-
                   thral ligament. One or two small suprapubic abdominal incisions must be made to allow for the tying of the sutures.
                   Specialized long needles are used to help the placement of these sutures, and a cystoscope often is used to verify
                   their placement. Perforation of the bladder is a common complication found upon cystoscopy. Finally, a suprapubic
                   catheter is placed at the end of the operation. Stamey and Pereyra suspensions are rarely performed and are mostly
                   of historical significance as they have been replaced by midurethral urinary incontinence slings.
                   Abdominal approaches: Burch (urethropexy) and the Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz (M-M-K) are probably the

                                                                                                                                                       Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   most common abdominal suspension procedures, though most clinicians have abandoned the MMK procedure due
                   to higher complication rates. The patient is placed in Allen stirrups the frog-leg position with a urethral catheter in

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                   place. A Pfannenstiel incision is used to enter the space of Retzius, which lies between the parietal peritoneum and
                   the rectus fascia under the pubic bone. Blunt dissection is used to open and extend this space. The surgeon then
                   inserts two fingers into the vagina to raise the anterior vagina and bladder neck. This enables the surgeon to place
                   two or more sutures in the tissue just lateral to the urethra and attach them to Cooper’s ligament (Burch) or to the
                   periosteum of the pubic symphysis (M-M-K).
                   The pubovaginal sling and highlight sling is often reserved for women in whom other incontinence operations have
                   failed. It can also be used as primary treatment for stress urinary incontinence, though it is more invasive than a
                   midurethral sling. The goal of the sling procedure is to produce extrinsic compression of the urethrovesical junction
                   with the help of a strip anchored to the rectus fascia or pubic bone (see Fig. 9-21, p. 919). With the patient in the
                   dorsal lithotomy position, a urethral catheter is placed and the vaginal mucosa incised and dissected off the under-
                   lying paravesical and paraurethral fascia, similar to the Kelly plication. The retropubic space is entered through a
                   Pfannenstiel’s incision, and a strip of rectus fascia, is obtained. The strip is then brought through the vagina, around
                   the urethra, and back to the abdomen, where it is fastened to the rectus fascia, creating a sling under the urethra at
                   the junction of the bladder neck. The vaginal and abdominal incisions are closed, and a suprapubic catheter is often
                   placed. If donor fascia lata or synthetic material is used, a small (~2”) horizontal incision is made above the pubic
                   bone for attachment of the sling. The patient’s own fascia lata (from the lateral thigh) can also be used.
                   Midurethral sling placement may be performed under local, regional, or general anesthesia. Local anesthesia may
                   be combined with conscious sedation. If local anesthesia is used, it will also be administered to the vaginal incision
                   site as well as the groin areas or suprapubic areas where the trocar and mesh will exit.
                   Tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) sling is a newer sling procedure for the treatment of stress urinary incontinence.
                   A polypropylene mesh sling is used to support the urethra, although it is not attached to the fascia. The mesh is
                   woven in such a way that the sling does slide out over time. Fibroblasts grow into the sling to anchor it throughout the
                   endopelvic fascia and around the dependent surface of the urethra. The patient is placed in a high dorsal lithotomy
                   position with the perineum at the end of the operating table for surgical exposure. The bladder is emptied and a
                   weighted speculum or retractor is inserted into the vagina. The vaginal mucosa is grasped near the middle of the ure-
                   thra with two clamps. The vaginal mucosa is hydrodissected with a small amount of vasoconstrictive solution (epi-
                   nephrine 1:200,000; phenylephrine 1:200,000; vasopressin 1–5 u/10 mL NS). This decreases blood loss significantly

===== PAGE 830 =====
830   c h a p t e r 8.2    Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   and helps to determine the depth of the mucosa. With the help of sharp and blunt dissection, the mucosa is freed
                                   laterally from its underlying adherent fascia, and two midurethral submucosal tunnels are made toward the under-
                                   side of the pubic symphysis. The TVT curved needle is introduced from the vagina through the space of Retzius on
                                   each side of the urethra and is brought out to the abdomen above the pubic bone. The sling mesh is attached to the
                                   ends of each needle; thus, when both needles are pulled through the abdominal sites, the mesh will rest under the
                                   urethra. A cystoscopy is done before pulling the mesh through to verify that neither needle is in the bladder or the
                                   urethra. The mesh is then adjusted so that the urethra is resting on the sling, under no tension. The transobturator
                                   tape (TOT) sling is a commonly used alternative to the TVT sling that does not enter the retropubic space. The sling
                                   is inserted under the midurethra and exits through the obturator membrane, inferior to the adductor longus tendon,
                                   through a poke incision lateral to the vagina in the groin. There are two variations: inside-out, where the trocars are
                                   passed from a midurethral vaginal incision to exit through bilateral groin incisions, or outside-in, where the trocars
                                   are passed from bilateral groin incisions to exit through a midurethral vaginal incision.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Stress urinary incontinence; intrinsic sphincter deficiency

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                                                 Mid-Urethral    M-M-K/
                                                          Kelly Plication                        Sling           Burch           Pubovaginal Sling

                                    Position              Dorsal lithotomy                       Lithotomy       Frog-leg        ⇐

                                    Incision              Vaginal mucosa                         2 suprapubic    Pfannenstiel    Vaginal and suprapubic
                                                                                                 and a vaginal                   incision
                                                                                                 incision

                                    Unique                Cushion area of leg against stirrup    ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                      considerations      to prevent peroneal injury. Epineph-
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                          rine (1:200,000) or vasopressin are
                                                          often infiltrated to reduce intraop
            Surgery

                                                          bleeding for vaginal approaches. In-
                                                          jections may cause ↑ BP and tachy-
                                                          dysrhythmias (epi) or bradydysrhyth-
                                                          mias (vasopressin). The urethral
                                                          catheter is frequently removed and
                                                          reinserted during surgery.

                                    Antibiotics           Cefoxitin 1–2 g iv                     ⇐               ⇐               ⇐

                                    Surgical time         1h                                     ⇐               ⇐               ⇐

                                    Closing               Suprapubic catheter                    ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                      considerations

                                    EBL                   50 mL                                  Roughly 50 mL   100–200 mL      50–100 mL

                                    Postop care           Inpatient                              Outpatient      ⇐               ± Outpatient

                                    Mortality             Minimal                                Minimal         ⇐               ⇐

                                    Morbidity             Detrusor instability: Rare (due to     < 7%            14%             ⇐
                                                          vaginal approach)                                      15%             N/A
                                                          Enterocele: Rare                       Rare            0.09%           Rare
                                                          Incisional hernia: Rare                ⇐               ⇐               ⇐
                                                          Osteitis pubis: Rare                   Rare            2%              ~40%
                                                          Voiding difficulties: Rare             < 2%            8.7%            Rare
                                                          Wound infection: Rare                  Rare                            Prolonged catheter
                                                                                                                                 time: > 50%
                                                                                                                                 Outlet obstruction:
                                                                                                                                 10–20%
                                                                                                                                 Urethral perforation: 7%
                                                                                                                                 Bladder perforation: 1%

                                    Pain score            4–6                                    1–3             6–8             4–6

===== PAGE 831 =====
Operations for Stress Urinary Incontinence    831

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              40–80 yr

                     Incidence              >1/5 women

                     Etiology               Multiparous state; obesity; chronic cough

                     Associated             Other components of pelvic relaxation syndrome (rectocele, uterine prolapse, enterocele)
                       conditions

                         ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: anterior and posterior colporrhaphy; enterocele repair; vaginal sacrospinous suspen-
                   sion; operations for stress urinary incontinence)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   This is usually an older patient population, past childbearing age. Assess for medical comorbidities.

                    Laboratory               Hb/Hct, as indicated from H&P.

                    Premedication            Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv.

                         INTRAOPERATIVE

                                                                                                                                                  Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Anesthetic technique: Regional or GA may be used.

                                                                                                                                                         Surgery
                   Regional anesthesia: A T10 sensory level is sufficient to provide anesthesia for procedures using a perineal
                   approach, but a T4 level is recommended for abdominal/combined approaches.

                    Spinal                   0.75% bupivacaine 10–15 mg in 8.25% dextrose (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesar-
                                             ean Section, p. 835.) ± 10–20 mg fentanyl ± 0.1–0.2 mg morphine

                    Epidural                 1.5–2.0% lidocaine with epinephrine 5 mcg/mL, 15–20 mL; supplement with 3–5 mL as
                                             needed. Supplemental iv sedation. (See Anesthetic Considerations for Cesarean Section,
                                             p. 835.) Spinal may provide better perineal block.

                    CSE                      Combined spinal/epidural (CSE): An alternative technique combining the rapid onset
                                             and density of spinal anesthesia with the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia.
                                             Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position patient as for spinal or epidural. The most
                                             common technique is the needle-through-needle. After the epidural space is located with
                                             a standard 17-ga Tuohy needle, insert a 4” 26- to 27-ga pencil-point spinal needle through
                                             it to administer 0.6 mL of spinal bupivacaine (0.75%) ± fentanyl 10 mcg ± morphine sulfate
                                             0.1–0.2 mg. Secure the epidural catheter and use if needed (a test dose is advisable).

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Standard induction (see p. B-2).

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                    Emergence                No special considerations

                    Blood and fluid          Normally minimal blood loss
                       requirements          IV: 18–20 ga × 1
                                             NS/LR at 2–4 mL/kg/h

===== PAGE 832 =====
832   c h a p t e r 8.2      Gynecology/Infertility Surgery

                                   Control of blood            Epinephrine, vasopressin, phenyl-           Surgeons may inject vasopressors into the submu-
                                     loss                      ephrine used by surgeons.                   cosa to minimize blood loss, which may cause ↑ BP
                                                                                                           and tachydysrhythmias (epi) or bradydysrhythmias
                                                                                                           (phenylephrine/vasopressin).

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (p. B-1)                  Although bladder catheterization prior to incision
                                                                                                           is normal, the catheter is not left in place through-
                                                                                                           out surgery in those patients undergoing anterior
                                                                                                           and posterior colporrhaphy, enterocele repair, and
                                                                                                           Kelly urethral plication. Suprapubic bladder cath-
                                                                                                           eters are placed toward the end of surgery in these
                                                                                                           procedures, as well as in the Stamey, Pereyra, and
                                                                                                           urethral sling procedures.

                                   Positioning                 3 and pad pressure points                   See p. 805 for concerns regarding the lithotomy
                                                               3 eyes                                      position.

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               PONV (see p. B-6).

                                   Pain                        IV opiates, ketorolac
                                     management                Usually rapid conversion to po pain
                                                               medications

                                   Tests                       None indicated
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Bent AE: Urinary stress incontinence. In: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 10th edition. Rock JA, Jones HW, eds. Lippincott
                                        Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2008, 942–58.
                                     2. Nygaard I, Menefee SA, Wall LL: Lower urinary tract disorders. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition.
                                        Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.
                                     3. Pereyra AJ, et al: Pubourethral supports in perspective: modified Pereyra procedure for urinary incontinence. Obstet Gynecol
                                        1982; 59(5):643–8.
                                     4. Richter HE, Varner RE: Pelvic organ prolapse. In: Berek JS, ed. Berek & Novak’s Gynecology, 14th edition. Lippincott Williams
                                        & Wilkins, Philadelphia: 2007, 601–36.
                                     5. Ross BK, Chaduck HS, Mancuso JS, et al: Sprotte needle for obstetric anesthesia: Decreased incidence of post dural puncture
                                        headache. Reg Anesth 1992; 17:29–33.

===== PAGE 833 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      8.3 Obstetric Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           M. Mark Taslimi, MD
                                           Yasser Y. El-Sayed, MD

                                           anesthesiologists
                                           Brendan Carvalho, MBBCh, FRCA
                                           Lee Coleman, MD

===== PAGE 834 =====
Cesarean Section—Lower Segment and Classic
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Cesarean section (C-section) is the delivery of the fetus through a horizontal or, less commonly, through
                                   a vertical incision in the lower uterine segment. The skin incision is made either as a Pfannenstiel’s (transverse in the
                                   crease above the pubis), a Maylard (in extremely obese patients), or vertical midline from umbilicus to pubis. The perito-
                                   neal cavity is entered as in any laparotomy. A retractor is placed inferiorly, and the reflection of visceral peritoneum from
                                   the bladder dome to the anterior lower segment of the uterus (bladder flap) is incised and may be displaced inferiorly,
                                   along with the bladder. The uterus is entered sharply and the incision extended with digital pressure and/or bandage
                                   scissors. The fetal head is elevated out of the pelvis and delivered through the uterine incision. In cases of nonvertex lie,
                                   the infant’s breech or foot is grasped and brought out of the incision. After the delivery of the fetus, the cord is double-
                                   clamped and cut, and cord blood is obtained for analysis. The placenta is removed manually and the uterine cavity
                                   cleared of all debris and clots. The uterine incision is closed with a running, interlocking stitch, followed by a 2nd imbri-
                                   cating layer. The bladder flap and parietal peritoneum do not require closure and the rectus muscles do not routinely re-
                                   quire re-approximation. Finally, the fascia is closed and the skin reapproximated with staples. Classic C-section usually
                                   involves a fundal vertical uterine incision (Fig. 8.3-1). Patients with a history of prior classical C-section should be deliv-
                                   ered abdominally via a repeat C-section, because their risk of uterine rupture with labor and vaginal delivery is ~12%.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Failure to progress in labor; elective repeat C-section; fetal distress; malpresentation
     Obstetric/Gynecologic
            Surgery

                                                                                  A                                    B

                                               Figure 8.3-1. Typical C-section incisions. A: Classic incision, in upper uterine
                                               segment. B: Low transverse incision.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                              Lower-Segment C-Section                              Classic C-Section

                                    Position                  Supine with left lateral tilt. (In obese patients,   ⇐
                                                              the pannus may be lifted superiorly by tape
                                                              or towel clips or inferiorly for a supraumbilical
                                                              incision.)

                                    Incision                  Skin: transverse low abdominal (Pfannenstiel’s) or   Skin: Pfannenstiel’s or, more commonly, verti-
                                                              repeat vertical. Uterus: transverse (Kerr) or low    cal midline. Uterus: vertical fundal
                                                              vertical (for premature infants or nonvertex lie)

                             834

===== PAGE 835 =====
Cesarean Section—Lower Segment and Classic           835

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                                           Lower-Segment C-Section                            Classic C-Section

                     Special               Bladder blade retractor; small ring forceps;       ⇐
                       instrumentation     bandage scissors; suction bulb; DeLee suction
                                           trap (if meconium)

                     Unique                3 fetal heart tones before procedure. If for       ⇐
                       considerations      CPD: vaginal exam within last 15 min before
                                           procedure. If for fetal distress: continuous
                                           monitoring until skin incision.

                     Antibiotics           If in labor or membranes ruptured: continue        ⇐
                                           prophylactic antibiotics or cefazolin 1–2 g
                                           iv (prior to incision or 30 min prior to
                                           delivery)

                     Surgical time         20–90 min                                          40–90 min

                     Closing               Low transverse: closed in 2 layers. Low verti-     3-layer closure requires additional time.
                       considerations      cal: 2 layers; may require additional operative
                                           time for control of incision bleeding or repair
                                           of incision extension into cervix.

                     EBL                   750–1000 mL                                        1000–2000 mL

                     Postop care           Observation for bleeding and ↓ BP                  Special attention to VS needed due to addi-
                                                                                              tional blood loss.

                                                                                                                                                     Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Mortality             < 0.1%                                             ⇐

                     Morbidity             Infection:

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                                              Not in labor: < 5%                              ⇐
                                              In labor/ruptured membranes: 50%                ⇐
                                              (antibiotics reduce incidence to 15%)
                                           Small-bowel obstruction (SBO): Rare                ⇐

                     Pain Score            4                                                  7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             14–45 yr

                     Incidence             10–30%

                     Etiology              Failure to progress (30%); repeat C-section (30%); fetal anomaly/other (20%); abnormal presenta-
                                           tion (10%); fetal distress (10%)

                     Associated            Preeclampsia/eclampsia; DIC; hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme, low Plt count (HELLP) syn-
                       conditions          drome; obstetrical hemorrhage/shock; chorioamnionitis

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: C-section; emergent obstetrical hysterectomy; repair of uterine rupture)

                         PREOPERATIVE
                   In general, patients are young and healthy, although the pregnant patient has undergone profound physiologic
                   changes that affect the administration of anesthesia. Women present for C-section for a multitude of reasons, in-
                   cluding failure to progress in labor, repeat cesarean delivery, breech presentation, and also for emergency cesarean
                   delivery for nonreassuring fetal heart rate tracing and/or hemorrhage (placenta previa, abruptio placenta, and,
                   rarely, uterine rupture).

===== PAGE 836 =====
836   c h a p t e r 8.3   Obstetric Surgery

                                   Respiratory             The pregnant patient has a compensated respiratory alkalosis (PCO2 = 32–34), ↑ minute
                                                           ventilation (MV; ↑ 50%), and ↓ FRC (↓ 20%). ↑ O2 consumption (↑ 20%) with ↓ FRC results
                                                           in rapid onset of hypoxemia if ventilation is compromised. Small airway closure due to
                                                           elevation of diaphragm (exaggerated by obesity and supine position) can → VQ mismatch
                                                           and ↓ PaO2. ↑ MV and ↓ FRC enhance uptake of inhalational anesthetics. Mucosal capil-
                                                           lary engorgement in upper airways may necessitate a smaller ETT and mandates careful
                                                           airway suctioning to avoid bleeding. Avoid any nasal airways. Airway changes can occur in
                                                           labor and necessitate an airway evaluation just prior to administration of anesthesia.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Cardiovascular          Typically, there is a ↓ SVR (↓ 15%), ↓ diastolic pressure and ↓ MAP (↓ 15%) with ↑ HR
                                                           (↑ 20%) and ↑ CO (↑ 30–40%, higher in multifetal pregnancy, higher in labor). Use left
                                                           uterine tilt (15°) to minimize aortocaval compression and supine hypotension. Immedi-
                                                           ately postpartum, 600–800 mL blood enters the central circulation, due to placental auto-
                                                           transfusion, with further ↑ in CO.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Hematologic             These patients have ↑ red cell mass (↑ 300–400 mL), ↑ plasma volume (↑ 1200–1300 mL),
                                                           ↑ blood volume (↑ 1500–1600 mL), ↑ more with multifetal pregnancy. WBC count may
                                                           ↑ to 15,000/mm3. Iron deficiency anemia often is superimposed on the dilutional anemia
                                                           of pregnancy (Hct 33%). The typical blood loss of 700–1000 mL is usually well tolerated.
                                                           Excessive blood loss is possible with uterine atony, multiple gestation, previous C-section,
                                                           PIH, placenta previa, abruptio placenta, and prolonged labor. Repeat C-section associated
                                                           with placenta previa poses high risk for hemorrhage because of increased risk for associ-
                                                           ated placenta accreta.
                                                           Tests: Hgb/Hct
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Gastrointestinal        Abnormalities, including ↑ intragastric pressure, ↓ esopageal spinchter tone, and ↓ gas-
                                                           tric motility (after onset of labor), predisposes to aspiration pneumonitis. All parturients
            Surgery

                                                           should be considered to have full stomachs and should receive nonparticulate antacid (e.g.,
                                                           0.3 M Na citrate 30 mL) immediately prior to general or regional anesthesia. Administer iv
                                                           metoclopramide 10 mg and ranitidine 150 mg or famotidine 20 mg before all C-sections.

                                   Hepatic                 Liver enzymes can be mildly elevated, alkaline phosphatase is elevated from placental
                                                           source, and plasma protein concentration is diminished (↑ unbound drug levels).
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Renal                   These patients have ↑ renal blood flow (↑ 50%), ↑ GFR, and ↑ creatinine clearance, and
                                                           ↓ serum creatinine and ↓ BUN. Dependent edema results from increased water and Na+
                                                           retention 2° resetting of the osmotic threshold for thirst and vasopressin secretions.
                                                           Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Laboratory              T&S maternal blood if risk factors for blood loss are present (e.g., third C-section). Routine
                                                           cross-match unnecessary unless significant blood loss is anticipated. Routine autologous
                                                           blood donation is not recommended. Coagulation studies and Plt count recommended
                                                           with PIH, abnormal placentation, heavy maternal bleeding. BUN, Cr, UA, and fasting
                                                           blood glucose; others as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication           Agents to decrease risk of aspiration pneumonitis include a nonparticulate antacid (e.g., Na
                                                           citrate 30 mL po), ranitidine 150 mg iv and metoclopramide 10 mg iv. Sedatives are not routinely
                                                           administered. In extremely anxious patients, however, 0.5–1.0 mg midazolam iv is an excellent
                                                           anxiolytic, without apparent effect on maternal memory or alertness or neonatal condition.

                                   SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

                                   Pregnancy-              PIH is characterized by generalized vasoconstriction with relative intravascular volume
                                     induced               depletion and, occasionally, diffuse capillary leak. There may be ↑ risk of hypotension
                                     hypertension          with regional anesthesia. Cautious hydration prior to regional anesthesia is necessary to
                                     (PIH)                 prevent hypotension or pulmonary edema. Hepatic dysfunction may be present (HELLP
                                                           syndrome). Epidural, spinal, and combined spinal-epidural (CSE) are all considered safe

===== PAGE 837 =====
Cesarean Section—Lower Segment and Classic               837

                    Pregnancy-               techniques in PIH assuming normal Plt count. Cardiovascular stability is better with regional
                      induced                than GA, provided intravascular volume is adequate. Abnormal coagulation (↓ Plt count
                      hypertension           or dysfunctional Plt) contraindicates regional anesthesia. If GA is necessary, it is vital that
                      (PIH)                  precautions are taken to ↓ laryngoscopic hypertensive response. Use supplementation
                      (cont’d)               along with RSI technique; lidocaine (1 mg/kg), emolol (1–2 mg/kg), and/or remifentanyl
                                             (0.5-1 mg/kg). Labetalol (20 mg) or hydrolazine (5–10 mg) can be used, but beware of onset
                                             times (< 5 min and 5–15 min, respectively), so choose drugs appropriate to urgency. There is a
                                             potential for difficult intubation in PIH due to airway edema; therefore, a small ETT (6.0 mm)
                                             should be available. MgSO4 potentiates neuromuscular blocking agents; avoid defasciculat-
                                             ing dose of muscle relaxant before induction, use smaller than normal doses of nondepolar-
                                             izing agents, and monitor neuromuscular function. MgSO4 may potentiate hypotension and
                                             increase vasopressor requirements.
                                             Tests: PT; PTT; Plt; TEG or bleeding time; LFTs

                    Eclampsia                Treat eclamptic Sz with adequate oxygenation and a small dose of either midazolam (2 mg)
                                             or propofol (20–40 mg). Intubate if necessary to protect airway. Initiate MgSO4 therapy
                                             (loading dose: 4–6 g iv over 20 min; then infuse @ 1–2 g/h). If 2nd seizure occurs during
                                             maintenance dose (rare); can administer 2nd bolus dose of 2 g over 5 min.

                    Massive                  Administer massive transfusion protocol (MTP) available at institution. Insert 2 large-bore
                       maternal              iv catheters (14–16 ga) and consider sending Hg/HCT and coagulation studies. Ensure
                       hemorrhage:           immediate availability of cross-matched blood and if unavailable consider uncross-matched
                    • Placenta previa        or O-negative blood. Rapidly restore intravascular volume with crystalloid, colloid, or both
                    • Abruptio placenta     until blood is available. If bleeding continues, administer MTP, consisting of a transfusion
                    • Ruptured uterus        of PRBC, plasma, and platelets. Induction with either ketamine (1–1.5 mg/kg) or etomidate
                                             (0.2–0.6 mg/kg) is preferred in hypovolemic or unstable patients. DIC and dilutional coag-

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                             ulopathy may follow abruptio placenta, amniotic fluid embolism, massive blood loss, and
                                             resuscitation. A ratio of RBC:FFP:PLT of 6:4:1 or RCB:FFP of 1:1 is currently recommended

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                                             during massive transfusion.
                                             Uterine atony is treated with oxytocin 20–40 U/L in NS @ rate sufficient to control atony
                                             (250–500 mL/h). Small boluses 1–2 U are appropriate, but avoid larger doses (risk of ↓
                                             BP); alternatively, methylergonovine, 0.2 mg im (risk of HTN), Carboprost Tromethamine
                                             (Hemabate; a synthetic analog of PGF2x), 0.25 mg im or intramyometrially (risk of pulmo-
                                             nary HTN, bronchospasm) or misoprostol (600 mg buccal or 1000 mg PR). Uterine artery
                                             embolization may be effective in controlling continued postpartum bleeding and may be
                                             considered before surgical artery ligation or hysterectomy. Emergency hysterectomy, how-
                                             ever, may be the only solution to continued bleeding. Induction of GA may be necessary if
                                             massive bleeding occurs during regional anesthesia.

                    Diabetes                 Diabetic patients have an increased propensity to ↓ BP following regional anesthesia.
                                             Determine blood glucose hourly and maintain at 80–100 mg/dL. Insulin requirements
                                             decrease drastically after delivery, and insulin dosage must be reduced to prevent maternal
                                             hypoglycemia.
                                             Tests: Fasting blood glucose; UA

                    Response to              In pregnant patients, MAC is ↓ 30% for inhaled agents; combined with more rapid uptake,
                      anesthetic             this predisposes to anesthetic overdose. Sensitivity to local anesthetics also is increased.
                      drugs                  Epidural space capacity is decreased 2° engorgement of epidural veins; this decreases
                                             requirements for local anesthetics and increases possibility of intravascular injection of
                                             drugs. Increased sensitivity to nondepolarizing muscle relaxants (especially in patients
                                             receiving MgSO4) mandates careful monitoring and use of reduced doses. Decreased pro-
                                             tein binding may increase toxicity of highly protein-bound drugs such as bupivacaine.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Regional (neuraxial) anesthesia has a number of materno-fetal advantages (↓ maternal
                   morality, ↓ risks of aspiration, participation in childbirth, better pain control) than GA. Anesthetic choice in specific

===== PAGE 838 =====
838   c h a p t e r 8.3     Obstetric Surgery

                                   circumstances depends on maternal and fetal conditions and degree of urgency. Properly conducted GA or regional
                                   anesthesia probably are equally safe for the fetus.
                                   Spinal anesthesia is preferred for elective or semielective C-section (unless patient has an existing epidural) when
                                   no contraindications to regional anesthesia exist (e.g., patient refusal, coagulopathy, active neurological disease,
                                   elevated ICP, hypovolemia, infection at site of insertion). With the use of a pencil-point needles (e.g., Sprotte, Whita-
                                    cre), the risk of headache is low (0.5–2%). Advantages of spinal over epidural anesthesia include technical ease,
                                    rapid onset of block, and more reliable anesthesia. ↓ BP, however, is more common with spinal anesthesia. Fluid
                                    (1–1.5 L crystalloid/500 mL colloid) preloading or coloading (at time of the spinal), leg wrapping (e.g., compression
                                    stockings), and vasopressors infusions (phenylephrine 25–50 mcg/min) reduce the incidence and severity of ↓ BP, but
                                    do not eliminate it. Additional boluses of vasopressors (e.g., phenylephrine [50–100 mcg] or ephedrine [5–10 mg]),
                                    should be used as appropriate to treat ↓ BP. Phenylephrine should be considered the vasopressor of choice due to
                                    its rapid onset, efficacy in treating ↓ SVR, and limited placental transfer. Ephedrine may be associated with ↑ fetal
                                   acidosis. Atropine (0.4 mg iv) should be used to treat ↓ HR. Consider using epinephrine (50–100 mcg iv) if other
                                   vasopressors are unsuccessful in reversing severe ↓ BP or profound ↓ HR.
                                   General anesthesia normally is used when regional anesthesia is contraindicated or when there is inadequate time
                                   to institute regional blockade. Obstetric emergencies for which rapid induction of GA may be indicated include
                                   severe maternal hemorrhage, prolapsed umbilical cord, severe fetal bradycardia, severe persistent fetal decelera-
                                   tions, or the need for intrauterine manipulation. Less dire situations often permit the performance of a quickly
                                   placed spinal or extension of a functioning epidural block with an agent having a rapid onset (e.g., 15–20 mL
                                   3% 2-chloroprocaine or 2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200,000 and bicarbonate). Continuous monitoring of the
                                   fetal heart rate (FHR) in the OR may allow use of regional anesthesia if the FHR tracing is reassuring. Constant
                                   communication with the obstetrician regarding maternal and fetal condition is essential. Although situations exist
                                   in which a GA is preferable to regional, the risks must be weighed against the benefits for patients with greater
                                   potential for complications. If difficult intubation is anticipated, rapid-sequence induction of GA with cricoid
                                   pressure should not be undertaken. Alternative approaches include awake intubation, regional anesthesia, or local
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   infiltration by the obstetrician. Sometimes, a nonreassuring FHR pattern is diagnosed as “fetal distress.” Fetal dis-
                                   tress is an imprecise and nonspecific term with little positive predictive value. The severity of any FHR abnormality
            Surgery

                                   should be considered when the urgency of delivery and type of anesthesia are determined. C-section performed
                                   for a nonreassuring FHR pattern does not necessarily preclude the use of regional anesthesia.
                                   Regional anesthesia:

                                   Epidural                   Apply monitors, fluid load, and place the patient in the sitting or lateral decubitus position.
                                                              Locate the epidural space with a 17-18 ga Tuohy needle and LOR to saline (preferable) or
                                                              air technique. A 3 mL test dose of 1.5–2% lidocaine (45–60 mg) with 1:200,000 epineph-
                                                              rine (15–20 mcg) is given through the epidural needle or catheter to exclude intravas-
                                                              cular injection (Sx: tachycardia, palpitations, dizziness, tinnitus, new taste in mouth) or
                                                              subarachnoid placement (motor/sensory block in lower extremities, rapid onset of pain
                                                              relief ). After 3–5 min, inject 15–20 mL 2% (300–400 mg) lidocaine with 1:200,000 epi-
                                                              nephrine (75–100 mcg) incrementally over 5–10 min. Sodium bicarbonate, 1 mEq/10 mL
                                                              lidocaine, hastens onset of block and improves the block quality, but increases risk of
                                                              ↓ BP. Bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, or ropivacaine 0.5%, 15–20 mL (75–100 mg), with
                                                              or without epinephrine 1:200,000 and/or fentanyl (50–100 mcg), or 2-chloroprocaine
                                                              (450–600 mg) or 2% lidocaine with epinephrine should produce adequate surgical anes-
                                                              thesia within 5–10 min.
                                                              Left uterine displacement is best achieved by evaluating the right hip with a wedge or
                                                              towel. Administer O2 by mask or nasal cannula, and continue to monitor FHR prior to
                                                              abdominal prep. Monitor BP every min until stable, then every 3–5 min. Treat ↓ in BP with
                                                              further uterine displacement, additional fluids, and vasopressors as outlined earlier. Main-
                                                              tain BP at baseline levels to optimize placental perfusion. For inadequate anesthesia, give
                                                              additional epidural local anesthetic, 50–100 mcg fentanyl iv or epidurally, 50% N2O/O2,
                                                              ketamine 10–20 mg iv, midazolam 1–2 mg iv, and/or infiltrate with local anesthetic. The
                                                              patient must remain conscious to avoid risk of aspiration. If anesthesia is still inadequate,
                                                              induce GA (see below).

===== PAGE 839 =====
Cesarean Section—Lower Segment and Classic                839

                    Epidural (cont’d)    After delivery of infant and placenta, rapidly infuse oxytocin 10–20 U/hr. Monitor for exces-
                                         sive blood loss, recognizing that significant blood loss can occur quickly and outside of direct
                                         observation, and is often underestimated. Chest pain, mild oxyhemoglobin desaturation,
                                         and SOB after delivery may be due to irritation of diaphragm by blood or packs, too high or
                                         inadequate level of anesthesia, or venous air or amniotic fluid embolization. Transient S-T
                                         segment changes on ECG may occur, but do not usually signify myocardial ischemia.

                    Spinal               Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position as for epidural anesthesia. Metoclopramide
                                         10 mg iv, 5–10 min prior to block decreases intraop N/V. Insert 25–27-ga pencil-point
                                         needle and verify free flow of CSF. If technical difficulties or urgent situations are encoun-
                                         tered, a larger pencil-point needle (e.g., 22-ga Sprotte) may be considered. Inject hyper-
                                         baric 0.75% spinal bupivacaine 11.25–12.0 mg (1.5–1.6 mL) ± fentanyl 10–20 mcg and
                                         preservative-free morphine 0.1–0.2 mg, and position the patient with left uterine displace-
                                         ment. Monitor and treat ↓ BP as for epidural. Adjust operating table position to insure a T4
                                         level of anesthesia. If anesthesia is inadequate and time permits, consider repeating block
                                         with CSE, spinal (caution with dosing), or epidural catheter. Treat persistent inadequate
                                         anesthesia as for epidural. Induce GA if other measures fail.

                    Combined             An alternative technique combining the rapid onset and density of spinal anesthesia with
                      spinal-            the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia (e.g., if necessary to extend the duration
                      epidural (CSE)     or intensity of the block). Apply monitors, administer fluid, and position as for spinal/
                                         epidural. The most common technique is the needle-through-needle. When the epidural
                                         space is located with a standard 17–18 ga Tuohy needle, insert a 25–27 ga pencil-point
                                         spinal needle through it and administer either a standard C-section spinal dose of bupi-
                                         vacaine and narcotics as described for spinal or reduced dose if indicated (e.g., repeated
                                         block after failed spinal or epidural; maternal cardiac disease or short stature). Secure the

                                                                                                                                                   Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                         epidural catheter and use if needed. Appreciate that the epidural catheter is untested and
                                         an epidural test dose is advisable prior to dosing.

                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction            Elevate the right hip (wedge or towel) to provide left uterine displacement. Preoxygenation
                                         for 3–5 min is optimal; however, 4–8 maximal inspiratory breaths in 30 sec is a satisfactory
                                         substitute in an emergency. Head up and CPAP may improve oxygenation in obese par-
                                         turients. Place patient in maximal “sniff ” position (ramp patient if necessary), to optimize
                                         position for intubation. After patient is prepped and draped and obstetric team is ready to
                                         begin, perform rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure. Administer propofol 2–3
                                         mg/kg (or ketamine 1–1.5 mg/kg or etomidate 0.2-0.6 mg/kg in hypovolemic or cardio-
                                         vascularly unstable patients) and succinylcholine 1–1.5 mg/kg to induce GA and facilitate
                                         intubation. Inflate cuff of ETT and verify tracheal placement by ETCO2 waveform and aus-
                                         cultation of bilateral breath sounds.

                    Failed intubation    If tracheal intubation is unsuccessful, oxygenation and mask ventilation must become a
                                         priority, and numerous attempts to intubate should be avoided. Summon experienced help
                                         and quickly decide whether surgery must proceed. The risks of continuing with mask GA
                                         and cricoid pressure must be weighed against the risk of allowing the mother to awaken. If
                                         mask ventilation is impossible, quickly attempt ventilation with an LMA. If this succeeds,
                                         either continue to use throughout the case or place an ETT (6 mm ID) through LMA
                                         blindly or with FOL; alternatively, use an intubating LMA. A Pro-seal LMA has been used
                                         successfully as a rescue supraglottic airway device in this situation and may negate the
                                         necessity for ET intubation. Cricoid pressure may interfere with mask ventilation or LMA
                                         placement and should be released if necessary. If LMA fails to allow ventilation, attempt
                                         emergency transtracheal ventilation using a 12–14 ga iv catheter (or specific cricothyroid
                                         airway device) and appropriate tubing to connect to a high-pressure O2 source (e.g., jet
                                         ventilator). If these measures are unsuccessful, an emergency cricothyrotomy or trache-
                                         ostomy should be performed by experienced personnel. Planning for a failed intuba-
                                         tion must occur before it actually happens. A difficult-intubation tray, including video
                                         laryngoscopes, supraglottic airways, and equipment for emergency jet ventilation, must be
                                         immediately accessible in or very near the delivery room.

===== PAGE 840 =====
840   c h a p t e r 8.3   Obstetric Surgery

                                   Maintenance             50% N2O/O2 with isoflurane, sevoflurane, or desflurane (limit MAC < 1.5 to prevent uter-
                                                           ine atony). Propofol infusion for maintenance negates the uterine relaxant effect of the
                                                           halogenated agents but may lead to more neonatal depression. Avoid hypocapnia during
                                                           controlled ventilation which may ↓ umbilical blood flow. After delivery, NDMR rarely
                                                           required, additional opioid (e.g., fentanyl 150–250 mcg) and increase volatile and N2O
                                                           concentrations if necessary. Administer small doses of muscle relaxants (e.g., vecuronium
                                                           2–3 mg or rocuronium 10–20 mg) if needed. Reverse with neostigmine 0.05 mg/kg and
                                                           glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg or atropine 0.02 mg/kg. Consider titrating longer-acting opioids
                                                           (e.g., hydromorphone 1–2 mg) for postpartum analgesia. Midazolam (1–2 mg), given after
                                                           delivery, helps avoid maternal awareness, which occasionally occurs with this anesthetic
                                                           technique. Consider TAP (transversus abdominus plane) blocks preemergence.

                                   Emergence               Delay extubation until patient is fully awake and muscle strength has returned to normal.

                                   Blood and fluid         Moderate blood loss                   Infuse 1–2 L dextrose-free crystalloid (± colloid 500
                                      requirements         IV: 16–18 ga × 1 (additional larger   mL) immediately prior to regional anesthesia. Typi-
                                                           IV access if hemorrhage)              cal blood loss = 700–1000 mL. A rapid-fluid infuser
                                                           NS/LR 1–3 L typical replacement       and blood warmer should be available in the event
                                                                                                 that large-volume blood transfusion is required.

                                   Monitoring              Standard monitors (see p. B-1)        Arterial BP monitoring via automated BP device, or
                                                           FHR monitor                           arterial line for severe or labile HTN. CVP useful in
                                                           ±CVP                                  PIH for oliguric patients unresponsive to fluid chal-
                                                           ±arterial line                        lenges. Occasionally, a PA catheter is indicated (e.g.,
                                                                                                 for pulmonary edema, unresponsive oliguria).

                                   Positioning             Left uterine displacement (blanket    Minimizes aortocaval compression.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                           under right hip and/or table tilt)
                                                           Amniotic fluid embolism               Rare cause of hemodynamic instability, hypox-
            Surgery

                                   Complications
                                                                                                 emia, and DIC. Often fatal. Rx: supportive: 100%
                                                                                                 O2, PEEP, and vasopressors. Correct Plt, clotting
                                                                                                 factors, and metabolic disturbances. CPB has been
                                                                                                 used successfully.

                                       POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications           VTE                                   Pregnancy and C-section increases risk of venous
                                                                                                 thromboembolism. DX: pleuritic chest pain, cough,
                                                                                                 hypoxemia, ↑ RR, ↑ HR, ↑ A-a gradient. Rx: sup-
                                                                                                 portive: 100% O2, volume expansion, and vasopres-
                                                                                                 sors. See p. B-8.
                                                           Postpartum hemorrhage                 See Anesthetic Considerations for Removal of
                                                                                                 Retained Placenta, p. 855.

                                   Pain                    Epidural: 2–4 mg (preservative-       Common side effects include: pruritus 70%, nausea
                                     management            free) morphine after delivery.        30–40%, and, rarely, respiratory depression. Nal-
                                                           Intrathecal: Morphine (preser-        buphine (5–10 mg) and naloxone (0.1–0.4 mg) are
                                                           vative-free) 0.1–0.2 mg given with    used for reversal of these side effects. Metoclo-
                                                           spinal local anesthetic.              pramide (10 mg iv) and/or ondansetron (4 mg
                                                           Chloroprocaine may interfere with     iv) may be needed for persistent nausea. Risk of
                                                           analgesia from epidural opioids       delayed respiratory depression in healthy patients is
                                                                                                 small; however, adequately trained nursing staff and
                                                                                                 a protocol for treatment of complications are man-
                                                                                                 datory if neuraxial opioids are used. These patients
                                                                                                 should not routinely receive sedatives or other sys-
                                                                                                 temic opioids for 12 h, and close monitoring of RR
                                                                                                 and level of consciousness every hour is necessary

===== PAGE 841 =====
Medical and Surgical Management of Postpartum Hemorrhage                        841

                    Pain                                                                     for 12 h then every 2 h for the next 12 h. Pulse
                      management                                                             oximetry and monitors of ventilation (e.g., ETCO2)
                      (cont’d)                                                               should be considered in high-risk patients, including
                                                                                             those with obstructive sleep apnea, morbid obesity,
                                                                                             and patients receiving additional sedatives.
                                                Parenteral opioids: iv opioids (e.g.,
                                                fentanyl 50–100 mcg, hydromor-
                                                phone 0.1–0.2 mg) boluses prn or
                                                PCA instituted in recovery room.
                                                NSAIDS (e.g., ketorolac): iv either
                                                in OR at end of case or in PACU or
                                                if unable to take orally post surgery.
                                                Acetaminophen: iv 1000 mg in OR
                                                or in PACU.
                                                Oral analgesics: NSAIDs (e.g.,
                                                ibuprofen) and acetaminophen
                                                around-the-clock dosing for 48–72
                                                postcesarean. Oxycodone or Hydro
                                                morphone (or equivalent oral opi-
                                                oid), for breakthrough pain man-
                                                agement. TAP block is a beneficial
                                                rescue analgesic option in select
                                                patients.

                    Tests                       As indicated

                                                                                                                                                                   Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                                          Surgery
                     1. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia: Practice guidelines for obstetric anesthesia: an
                        updated report by the ASA Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2007; 106:281–7.
                     2. Bloom SL, Spong CY, Weiner SJ, et al: Complications of anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Obstetric Gynecol 2005; 106:281–7.
                     3. Fettes PD, Jansson JR, Wildsmith JA: Failed spinal anesthesia: mechanics, management, and prevention. Br J Anesth 2009;
                        102:739–48.
                     4. Hawkins JL, Koonin LM, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States: 1979–2002. Obstetric
                        Gynecol 2011; 117:69–74.
                     5. Ngan Kee WD, Khaw KS, Tan PE, et al: Placental transfer and fetal metabolic effects of phenylephrine and ephedrine during
                        spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Anesthesiology 2009; 111:506–12.
                     6. Rollins M, Lucero J: Overview of anesthetic considerations for cesarean delivery. British Medical Bulletin 2012; 101:105–25.
                     7. Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple cesarean deliveries. Obstetric Gynecol
                        2006; 107:1226–32.
                     8. Soltanifar S, Russell R: The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines for caesarean section, 2011 update:
                        implications for the anesthetist. Int J Obstet Anesth 2012; 21:264–72.
                     9. Wray S, Plaat F: Regional anesthesia for caesarean section and what to do when it fails. Anesth Intensive Care Med 2007; 8(8):
                        320–22.

                   Medical and Surgical Management of
                   Postpartum Hemorrhage
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: The most common indication for postpartum uterine devascularization and hysterectomy is in-
                   tractable postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). PPH is clinically defined as any uncompensated postpartum blood loss
                   → tissue hypoperfusion. There are four major causes of PPH: retained products of conception (POC), laceration
                   of the genital tract, uterine atony, and coagulopathies. Inherited coagulopathies include von Willebrand’s disease,

===== PAGE 842 =====
842   c h a p t e r 8.3    Obstetric Surgery

                                   hemophilia, and factor XI deficiency. Acquired coagulopathies are most often related to thrombocytopenia 2°
                                   preeclampsia/eclampsia, hypofibrinogenemia 2° long-standing fetal demise, placental abruption, and DIC related to
                                   massive blood loss.
                                   Postpartum blood loss can be reduced by prophylactic use of oxytocin, methylergonovine, or prostaglandins, and
                                   these same agents are used as the first line of treatment for PPH. A concentrated oxytocin infusion (e.g., 80–100 U in
                                   500 mL over 30 min) may be used. Methylergonovine should be given im only (0.2 mg q 2–4 h up to 1 mg) because
                                   iv infusion has been reported to cause acute HTN, stroke, and Sz. Ergot derivatives are contraindicated in patients
                                   with Hx of HTN, asthma, Raynaud’s syndrome, or migraine. PGF2α (Hemabate) may be injected im (intramyometrial)
                                   at a dose of 0.25 mg, up to a total of 2 mg. Misoprostol, an inexpensive PGE, may be given rectally (up to 800 mcg).
                                   Simultaneously, the surgeon should explore the cause of PPH and apply a specific treatment. If PPH is not con-
                                   trolled with treatment of uterine atony, and after volume replacement and correction of any coagulopathy, tem-
                                   porizing measures should be applied while preparing the patient for definitive invasive treatments. Temporizing
                                   measures include packing of uterine cavity with a long gauze and use of balloon tamponade. Extensive experience on
                                   nonpneumatic antishock garment (ASG) on nonpregnant patients is applied to postpartum patients with remarkable
                                   success in temporizing hypovolemic shock from abdominal and pelvic bleeding. ASG can be applied quickly and
                                   results in an immediate 1500–2000 mL autotransfusion. ASG should not be used with fetus in situ or thoracic site
                                   of hemorrhage. After stabilization, patient should be transferred to radiology for uterine artery embolization under
                                   fluoroscopic control where uterine arteries are selected and absorbable Gelfoam pledgets are introduced. Treatment
                                   may be repeated until bleeding is stopped. In known cases of placenta accreta, in anticipation of PPH, catheters have
                                   been placed in uterine arteries before C-section.
                                   If selective embolization is not available or fails to stop hemorrhage, more invasive surgical intervention should be
                                   employed, including uterine compression sutures, iliac artery ligation, uterine devascularization, and hysterec-
                                   tomy. The decision for surgical intervention is made when other options (i.e., medical, interventional radiology)
                                   have not been successful in decreasing the hemorrhage. Volume and coagulation factor replacement should continue
                                   while proceeding with surgery.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   The technique for an emergent obstetrical hysterectomy is largely similar to a hysterectomy for other indica-
            Surgery

                                   tions. Of note is the engorged and prominent nature of the vessels supplying the gravid uterus. The edematous
                                   tissues surrounding the uterus are very friable and may bleed profusely if improperly manipulated. A supracervi-
                                   cal or total hysterectomy may be performed. Through a midline or Pfannenstiel’s incision, the uterus is elevated
                                   out of the abdominal cavity. The round ligaments are clamped, transected, and ligated; and the anterior leaf of
                                   the broad ligament is incised bilaterally from the transected round ligaments to the vesicouterine reflection. The
                                   posterior leaf of the broad ligament adjacent to the uterus is entered at a level just below that of the fallopian tubes
                                   and uteroovarian ligaments. These are then clamped, transected, and ligated. Next, incision of the posterior leaf
                                   of the broad ligament toward the cardinal ligaments is performed. With gentle blunt dissection, the bladder and
                                   attached vesicouterine peritoneal flap are dissected off the lower uterine segment. The ascending uterine arteries
                                   and veins are identified bilaterally, then clamped, transected, and ligated. If a subtotal hysterectomy is planned,
                                   the body of the uterus is amputated at this level, and the cervical stump is closed with interrupted sutures. If a total
                                   hysterectomy is planned, dissection of the bladder off the cervix is continued until the cervicovaginal margin is
                                   identified. The cardinal and uterosacral ligaments are clamped, transected, and ligated, with clamps placed as close
                                   to the cervix as possible without including cervical tissue. After the level of the lateral vaginal fornix is reached,
                                   a clamp is swung below the cervix, across the lateral vaginal fornix. The cervix is then amputated off the vaginal
                                   cuff. Throughout the procedure, it is vital to clamp and ligate any bleeding vessels and to take extra care to avoid
                                   damage to the ureter or bladder. Following removal of the uterus and cervix, the vaginal cuff angles are sutured to
                                   the ipsilateral cardinal ligament stumps, and the vaginal cuff is closed with a running locked stitch. The abdominal
                                   wall is closed in layers.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Intractable postpartum bleeding; rupture of gravid uterus

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Supine, with left lateral tilt

                                    Incision                Pfannenstiel’s or midline longitudinal

                                    Unique                  Monitoring of coagulation parameters and correction of DIC. Consider central venous hemody-
                                      considerations        namic monitoring. Pediatrics team present, if indicated.

===== PAGE 843 =====
Medical and Surgical Management of Postpartum Hemorrhage                    843

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Antibiotics             Cefazolin 1 g iv q 8 h; total 3 doses

                     Surgical time           2–3 h

                     Closing                 Subcutaneous intraperitoneal drains, if indicated.
                       considerations

                     EBL                     3000–4000 mL

                     Postop care             ICU if blood loss severe; patient may require continued intubation and mechanical ventilatory sup-
                                             port. Monitor for infectious morbidity and acute renal failure.

                     Mortality               < 1%

                     Morbidity               Hemorrhage
                                             Postop febrile morbidity
                                             DIC
                                             Wound infection
                                             Sheehan’s syndrome
                                             Bladder injury
                                             Intraperitoneal bleeding requiring reoperation
                                             Vesicovaginal fistula
                                             Ureterovaginal fistula
                                             Transfusion-related complications

                     Pain score              7

                                                                                                                                                           Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                     Age range               Reproductive age

                     Incidence               0.11% of obstetric patients

                     Etiology                Unknown

                     Associated              Placenta accreta; uterine atony nonresponsive to medical or other surgical intervention; extension
                       conditions            of cervical tear to lower uterine segment; placenta previa; uterine rupture; uterine inversion

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Cesarean Section, p. 835.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. AbdRabbo SA: Stepwise uterine devascularization: a novel technique for management of uncontrolled postpartum
                        hemorrhage with preservation of the uterus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994; 171:694–700.
                     2. B-Lynch C, Coker A, Lawal AH, et al: The B-Lynch surgical technique for the control of massive postpartum haemorrhage:
                        an alternative to hysterectomy? Five cases reported. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1997; 104:372–5.
                     3. Bukowski R, Hankins GDV: Managing postpartum hemorrhage. Contemporary OB/GYN 2001; 9:92–105.
                     4. Cho JH, Jun HS, Lee CN: Hemostatic suturing technique for uterine bleeding during cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 2000;
                        96(1):129–31.
                     5. Cunningham FG, MacDonald PC, Gant NF, et al: Cesarean delivery and cesarean hysterectomy. In: Williams Obstetrics,
                        22nd edition. Appleton & Lange, Stamford: 2005.
                     6. Hansch E, Chitkara U, McAlpine J, et al: Pelvic arterial embolization for control of obstetric hemorrhage: a five-year
                        experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999; 180(6):1454–60.
                     7. Hensleigh PA: Anti-shock garment provides resuscitation and haemostasis for obstetric haemorrhage. BJOG 2002;
                        109(12):1377–84.
                     8. Mousa H, Walkinshaw S: Major postpartum hemorrhage. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2001; 13(6):595–603.
                     9. Oyelese Y, Scorza W, Mastrolia R, et al: Postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2007; 34(3):421–41.
                    10. Tamizian O, Arulkumaran S: The surgical management of postpartum hemorrhage. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2001;
                        13(2):127–31.

===== PAGE 844 =====
844   c h a p t e r 8.3     Obstetric Surgery

                                   REPAIR OF UTERINE RUPTURE
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Rupture of the gravid uterus is considered a true obstetric emergency and can be catastrophic, with
                                   significant maternal and fetal mortality. The classic symptoms are “shearing” pain, cessation of uterine contractions,
                                   loss of fetal heart tones, and the onset of vaginal bleeding. Unfortunately, these warning symptoms occur only in a
                                   minority of uterine rupture cases. Extrusion of the placenta through the uterine rupture may result in late decelera-
                                   tions due to uteroplacental insufficiency. Extrusion of the umbilical cord may be manifested by recurrent variable
                                   decelerations. Suprapubic pain as the only symptom has not been associated with uterine rupture. Causes of uterine
                                   rupture include breakdown of a previous uterine scar, obstructed labor, or uterine trauma. In cases where the uterine
                                   rupture occurs at the site of a prior uterine scar, the clinical course is usually less severe and the blood loss less than
                                   in cases of primary rupture of an intact uterus. The incidence of uterine rupture at the site of the old scar is 0.5% for
                                   lower-uterine transverse C-sections and 12% for classic C-sections.
                                   Total abdominal hysterectomy (see p. 820), or supracervical hysterectomy (p. 841), is the definitive therapy;
                                   however, depending on the clinical situation and the patient’s wishes for future fertility, a uterine repair may be
                                   undertaken. This consists of a 2- to 3-layered closure of the defect, using synthetic absorbable sutures. A transverse
                                   abdominal incision is made ~3 cm above the symphysis pubis and carried to the anterior rectus fascia. The fascia
                                   is incised and the muscles of the anterior abdominal wall separated sharply and bluntly from the midline. The peri-
                                   toneum is elevated and entered sharply. Because of the emergent nature of this condition and the possible massive
                                   blood loss associated with rupture of a gravid uterus, the anesthesiologist must act quickly. Prompt O2 administra-
                                   tion, together with aggressive iv fluid resuscitation, followed by transfusion of PRBC, Plt, and FFP, is indicated. Seri-
                                   ous consideration should be given to the use of unmatched O(-) or type-specific blood until cross-matched blood
                                   becomes available. Intraop hypogastric or uterine artery ligation may help minimize blood loss. Patient’s coagulation
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   parameters must be monitored because hypoxia and massive blood loss are associated with DIC.
            Surgery

                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Uterine rupture

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Supine with left-lateral tilt

                                    Incision                 Pfannenstiel’s (low, transverse abdominal) or midline longitudinal

                                    Unique                   Pediatrics team present for infant resuscitation, if necessary. Thorough surgical exploration of
                                      considerations         the urinary tract (bladder and ureters), because ~10% of cases are associated with bladder lac-
                                                             erations. Cell Saver may be helpful.

                                    Antibiotics              Cefazolin 1 g iv q 8 h × 3 doses

                                    Surgical time            1–2 h

                                    EBL                      500–3000 mL

                                    Postop care              ICU if blood loss severe; MTP for continued hemorrhage; continued intubation and mechanical
                                                             ventilatory support if aggressive fluid resuscitation results in pulmonary edema. Acute renal
                                                             failure may occur 2° hypoxic and hypovolemic renal injury at time of acute uterine rupture with
                                                             massive bleeding; monitor UO and serial renal function tests.

                                    Mortality                Fetal : 35–45%
                                                             Maternal: 5%

                                    Morbidity                Blood transfusion > 5 U: 58%
                                                             Postop wound infection: 33%
                                                             Pelvic abscess: 8%
                                                             Repeat uterine rupture with subsequent pregnancies: 5%

                                    Pain score               6

===== PAGE 845 =====
Postpartum Tubal Ligation      845

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Reproductive age

                     Incidence               1/1400 deliveries

                     Etiology                Prior uterine surgery; grand multiparity; obesity; manual removal of placenta; injury from tools of
                                             abortion; direct or indirect violence; oxytocin use; intraamniotic or vaginal prostaglandins; breech
                                             extractions; internal or external version; forceps rotation; shoulder dystocia; fundal pressure;
                                             neglect (cephalopelvic disproportion, etc.); congenital uterine anomaly; cornual pregnancy; gesta-
                                             tional trophoblastic neoplasia; placenta percreta; abruptio placenta

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Cesarean Section, p. 835.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Chazotte C, Cohen WR: Catastrophic complications of previous cesarean section. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990; 163(3):738–42.
                     2. Cunningham FG, MacDonald PC, Gant NF, et al: Surgical sterilization. In: Williams Obstetrics, 22nd edition. Appleton &
                        Lange, Stamford: 2005.
                     3. Eden RD, Parker RT, Gall SA: Rupture of the pregnant uterus: a 53-year review. Obstet Gynecol 1986; 68(5):671–74.
                     4. Kaczmarczyk M, Sparen P, Terry P, et al: Risk factors for uterine rupture and neonatal consequences of uterine rupture:
                        a population-based study of successive pregnancies in Sweden. BJOG 2007; 114(10):1208–14.
                     5. Plauche WC, VonAlmen W, Muller R: Catastrophic uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 1984; 64(6):792–97.
                     6. Sawyer MM, Lipshitz J, Anderson GD, et al: Third-trimester uterine rupture associated with vaginal prostaglandin E2. Am J
                        Obstet Gynecol 1981; 140(6):710–11.
                     7. Walsh C, Baxi L: Rupture of the primigravid uterus: a review of the literature. Obstet Gynec Surv 2007; 62(5):327–34.

                                                                                                                                                           Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                  Surgery
                   Postpartum Tubal Ligation
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Postpartum tubal ligation (PPTL) is female surgical sterilization performed at the time of cesarean
                   section (C-section) after delivery of the infant and repair of the uterine incision or within the first several days
                   after a vaginal delivery. Although PPTL can be performed immediately postpartum, problems in the neonate may
                   not be immediately evident, and a delay in surgery may be appropriate. If performed after a vaginal delivery, a
                   small infraumbilical incision is made in the skin and carried down through the parietal peritoneum. The fallopian
                   tubes are identified and brought out of the incision. It is important to identify the fimbriated end of the tube to
                   ensure that the structure ligated is not the round ligament. A midsegment portion of the tube over an avascular
                   portion of mesosalpinx is selected, and tubal patency is disrupted by a variety of methods (Pomeroy, Parkland,
                   Irving, Uchida, etc.). The Pomeroy, or a modification of it, is the most common technique used. The segment
                   of tube grasped is ligated with absorbable suture, and the knuckle of tube formed is excised. The cut ends of the
                   tubes should be hemostatic before replacing the tubes into the abdomen. The wound is closed in layers in the usual
                   fashion.
                   The consent for sterilization requires special consideration. The procedure is strictly elective and voluntary and must
                   be considered permanent, even though reversal may be possible. Some patients will eventually regret the decision
                   to undergo permanent sterilization. The risk of sterilization failure and an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy in
                   case of failure must be reviewed. The full range of alternatives to PPTL, including an interval sterilization procedure
                   (sterilization performed remote from pregnancy) must also be considered.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Desire for permanent sterilization

===== PAGE 846 =====
846   c h a p t e r 8.3    Obstetric Surgery

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position               Supine; steep Trendelenburg often required to allow bowel to fall away for exposure.

                                    Incision               Infraumbilical

                                    Special                Small Richardson and Army/Navy retractors; Babcock clamps; vein retractor
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                 A special consent form for sterilization must be signed by the patient in advance of the surgery.
                                      considerations       The bladder must be drained prior to the procedure.

                                    Antibiotics            None recommended

                                    Surgical time          15–25 min (Uchida technique may ↑ operative time)

                                    EBL                    10 mL

                                    Postop care            Routine postpartum care after recovery from anesthesia

                                    Mortality              3/100,000

                                    Morbidity              Hemorrhage
                                                           Infection
                                                           Incidental damage to bowel or bladder

                                    Pain score             3

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range              Reproductive age
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Incidence              The most common contraceptive procedure in the United States.
            Surgery

                                       ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                                       PREOPERATIVE
                                   Optimal timing of tubal ligation remains controversial. Often, it is more convenient for both the surgeon and
                                   the parturient with a functioning epidural catheter to have surgery immediately after delivery. Some obstetri-
                                   cians however, favor waiting 8–24 h, when adequate assessment of the neonate should be complete and risk of
                                   postpartum complications, including maternal hemorrhage are lessened. Alternatively, the patient’s existing
                                   labor epidural catheter can be left in place and reinjected at a later time (successful epidural reactivation within
                                   24 h is possible in > 92% of patients and drops to < 80% after 24 h). Because pulmonary aspiration remains a
                                   theoretical risk, initiation of GA or spinal anesthesia often is delayed 8–24 h until the acute GI changes of preg-
                                   nancy have regressed and the patient is NPO for 8 h. Shorter hospital stays after vaginal delivery are encourag-
                                   ing more tubal ligations during the first 12 h after delivery and it is unknown whether this affects morbidity or
                                   mortality.

                                   Respiratory              FRC returns to normal almost immediately after delivery. Laryngeal edema may persist in
                                                            postpartum patients after protracted expulsive efforts during labor and in the preeclamptic
                                                            → requirement for a small ETT. Laryngeal edema can also turn an expected easy airway
                                                            into a difficult intubation.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Cardiovascular           The physiologic changes of pregnancy return to normal at varying intervals after delivery.
                                                            For example, risk of aortocaval compression disappears immediately. Blood volume and
                                                            hemodynamic changes return to prepregnant values over several days to weeks. Postpar-
                                                            tum hemorrhage can occur without warning.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 847 =====
Postpartum Tubal Ligation       847

                    Gastrointestinal         Postpartum patients continue to be at risk for acid aspiration, although it is not known
                                             exactly when normal GI function returns. If elective PPTL is planned within 8 h of delivery,
                                             patient should have no oral intake of solid foods during labor and the postpartum period.
                                             Precautions for prevention of acid aspiration should be followed as discussed in Cesarean
                                             Section, p. 836.

                    Neurological             Local anesthetic requirements for spinal and epidural anesthesia remain decreased com-
                                             pared to nonpregnant patients for 36–48 h after delivery.

                    Laboratory               Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication            Precautions should be taken to ↓ risk of aspiration pneumonitis, as discussed in Cesarean
                                             Section, p. 836.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Spinal anesthesia is preferred, if a functioning labor epidural catheter is not in place. Epi-
                   dural catheters frequently become dislodged after a patient becomes ambulatory. GA is acceptable if patient has a
                   strong preference or if contraindications to regional anesthesia exist. These patients may be at risk for aspiration of
                   gastric contents at least 8–24 h post-delivery.
                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Spinal                   For technique and monitoring for spinal anesthesia, see Cesarean Section, p. 838. Hyper-
                                             baric bupivacaine (7.5–10 mg) ± fentanyl (10–20 mcg), with goal of obtaining a T6 level
                                             of anesthesia. Sedate patient as necessary with small doses of iv midazolam 0.5–1.0 mg.
                                             A 3 mL epidural test dose, followed after 3–5 min by 15–20 mL of either 2% lidocaine with

                                                                                                                                                    Obstetric/Gynecologic
                    Epidural
                                             1:200,000 epinephrine or 3% chloroprocaine injected incrementally. Titrate local anes-
                                             thetic as needed to ensure adequate level of anesthesia. Consider adding fentanyl 100 mcg

                                                                                                                                                           Surgery
                                             epidurally to reduce local anesthetic requirements and extend the duration of analgesia for
                                             several hours postoperatively.

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                Rapid-sequence induction with propofol (2–3 mg/kg) and succinylcholine (1–1.5 mg/kg)
                                             for ET intubation. In selected patients >24 h after delivery, supraglottic airway devices
                                             (e.g., proseal LMA) may be appropriate.

                    Maintenance              Standard maintenance (p. B-3)

                    Emergence                Extubation should be delayed until patient is fully awake and protective airway reflexes
                                             have returned.

                    Blood and fluid          Minimal blood loss                      1–1.5 L dextrose-free crystalloid immediately prior
                       requirements          IV: 18 ga × 1                           to regional anesthesia

                    Monitoring               Standard monitors (p. B-1)

                    Positioning              3 and pad pressure points
                                             3 eyes

                    Complications            None specific

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            Minimal bleeding

===== PAGE 848 =====
848   c h a p t e r 8.3      Obstetric Surgery

                                   Pain                        Neuraxial opioids: Fentanyl intrathecally 10–20 mcg or epidurally 50–100 mcg. Some
                                     management                authors propose small doses of intrathecal or epidural morphine to improve duration of
                                                               analgesia but patients then require 24 h monitoring.
                                                               Oral or Parenteral opioids: Oral opioids (e.g., oxycodone 5–10 mg), iv opioids (e.g.,
                                                               morphine 2–4 mg iv, up to 20 mg), or hydromorphone 1–2 mg iv instituted in the recov-
                                                               ery room.
                                                               NSAIDs: Intravenous (e.g., ketorolac 15–30 mg) or oral (e.g., ibuprofen 600 mg) as neces-
                                                               sary may be effective for pain of a cramping nature.

                                   Tests                       None routinely indicated.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG Committee Opinion, Committee on Ethics: Sterilization of
                                        women, including those with mental disabilities. No 371, 2007 (replaces No 63, 1988, No 73, 1989, and No 216 1999). Obstet
                                        Gynecol 2007; 110(1):217–20.
                                     2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG Committee Opinion, Committee on Obstetrics, Maternal and
                                        Fetal Sterilization: Postpartum tubal sterilization. No 105, 1992. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1992; 39(3):244.
                                     3. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG technical bulletin. Benefits and Risks of Sterilization. No
                                        46, 2003 (replaces No 222, 1996 and No 113, 1988). Obstet Gynecol 2003; 102(3):647–58.
                                     4. Bucklin BA: Postpartum tubal ligation: timing and other anesthetic considerations. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2003; 46(3)657–66.
                                     5. Evans NR, et al: A prospective observational study of the use of the Proseal laryngeal mask airway for postpartum tubal
                                        ligation. Int J Obstet Anesth 2005; 14:90–5.
                                     6. Gupta L, et al: Ambulatory laparoscopic tubal ligation: a comparison of general anesthesia with local anesthetic and sedation.
                                        J Anesth Clin Pharmacol 2011; 27:97–100.
                                     7. Habib AS, et al: Intrathecal morphine for analgesia after postpartum bilateral tubal ligation. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:239–43.
                                     8. Marcus RL, et al: Postoperative epidural morphine for postpartum tubal ligation analgesia. Anesth Analg 2005; 101:876–81.
                                     9. Rastogi S, Ruether P: Visceral pain during tubal ligation under spinal anesthesia for caesarean section. Int J Obstet Anesth
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                        2008: 78–96.
            Surgery

                                   Repair of Vaginal/Cervical Lacerations
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Vaginal and cervical lacerations may occur 2° trauma of spontaneous and operative vaginal delivery.
                                   Adequate repair requires optimal surgical assistance, exposure, and patient comfort. Repair may be performed in a
                                   birthing bed or may require patient positioning, lighting, anesthesia, or monitoring capabilities available only in an
                                   OR. Vaginal and cervical lacerations can extend into the perineum, rectum, urethra, bladder, lower uterine segment,
                                   broad ligament, or peritoneal cavity.
                                   Lacerations of the lower vagina generally are easy to identify and repair. Small, superficial lacerations that do not
                                   bleed often do not need repair, whereas larger ones should be approximated. Deep lacerations may cause profuse
                                   bleeding; if it persists despite placement of multiple stitches, brief tamponade may be adequate to achieve hemosta-
                                   sis or vaginal packing may be required. Lacerations involving the perineum are classified as follows: First degree—
                                   involves break in mucosa and skin. Second degree—involves deeper tissue (bulbocavernosus and levator ani fascia
                                   and muscle). Third degree—involves anal sphincter. Fourth degree—extends into rectal mucosa. First- and second-
                                   degree lacerations are repaired in layers with continuous or interrupted stitches. The skin usually is closed with a
                                   subcuticular stitch. When the anal sphincter is lacerated, it often retracts. The ends are grasped with Allis clamps
                                   and approximated with multiple stitches. When the laceration extends into the rectum, the rectal mucosa usually is
                                   closed in two layers, with the second layer imbricating the first. With periurethral lacerations, a catheter may need to
                                   be placed in the urethra to prevent passing a stitch through it. A laceration involving the urethra or bladder should
                                   be closed in multiple layers, followed by bladder drainage for several days.
                                   Lacerations of the upper vagina are often difficult to visualize. Uterine bleeding and the umbilical cord of an unde-
                                   livered placenta can obscure the field, and it can be difficult to determine if bleeding is vaginal or uterine. It is helpful
                                   to deliver the placenta and control uterine bleeding before proceeding. After visualization is adequate, it is important

===== PAGE 849 =====
Repair of Vaginal/Cervical Lacerations      849

                   to place the first stitch above the apex of the laceration to control bleeding from vessels that may have retracted.
                   Again, vaginal packing may be required if oozing of blood persists.
                   Superficial lacerations of the cervix occur with most deliveries but usually do not require treatment. Deep lacera-
                   tions can cause significant blood loss, especially when they involve larger branches from the uterine artery or extend
                   into the lower uterine segment. Again, the first stitch must be placed above the apex of the laceration to control
                   bleeding from vessels that may have retracted. A laparotomy may be necessary if a laceration extends into the lower
                   uterine segment or broad ligament and is causing significant bleeding that cannot be controlled otherwise. Alterna-
                   tively, uterine artery embolization may be considered.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Vaginal or cervical laceration

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Dorsal lithotomy

                     Incision                None (unless exploratory laparotomy is performed)

                     Special                 Right-angle retractors; ring forceps; Allis clamps; Gelpi retractor; vaginal packing
                       instrumentation

                     Antibiotics             May be used for lacerations involving entry into the peritoneal cavity or the rectal mucosa.

                     Surgical time           10–45 min (possibly longer if exploratory laparotomy is performed)

                     EBL                     Variable. Possible need for transfusion. Areas that persistently ooze after repeated placement of
                                             suture may be managed with vaginal packing.

                     Postop care             PACU → ward

                     Mortality               Rare

                                                                                                                                                        Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Morbidity               Hemorrhage

                                                                                                                                                               Surgery
                                             Hematoma
                                             Infection
                                             Rectovaginal fistula
                                             Vesicovaginal fistula

                     Pain score              3

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               Reproductive age

                     Incidence               Not uncommon

                     Etiology                Trauma 2° spontaneous or operative vaginal delivery (98%); other vaginal/pelvic trauma (2%)

                     Associated              Major blood loss possible; with nonobstetric etiology, the possibility of sexual assault needs to
                       conditions            be explored.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Vaginal and cervical lacerations are reported in up to 6% of women during vaginal delivery. These lacerations may be
                   associated with severe postpartum hemorrhage and can extend into the lower uterine segment leading to consider-
                   able blood loss that may go undetected. Patients should be examined carefully for Sx of hypovolemia with appropriate
                   volume resuscitation prior to anesthesia. Evaluation and exploration of all but the most superficial of lacerations needs
                   to be done in the operating room to optimize anesthesia options, hemodynamic monitoring, and surgical exposure.

                    Respiratory              FRC returns to normal soon after delivery.
                                             Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 850 =====
850   c h a p t e r 8.3   Obstetric Surgery

                                   Cardiovascular           The physiologic changes of pregnancy return to normal at varying intervals after delivery.
                                                            For example, risk of aortocaval compression disappears immediately. Blood volume and
                                                            hemodynamic changes return to prepregnant values over several days to weeks. Postpar-
                                                            tum hemorrhage can occur without warning. Ensure adequate fluid resuscitation prior to
                                                            induction of GA or regional anesthesia.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Gastrointestinal         Postpartum patients continue to be at risk for acid aspiration, although it is not known
                                                            exactly when normal GI function returns. Precautions for prevention of acid aspiration
                                                            should be followed as discussed in Cesarean Section, p. 836.

                                   Neurological             Local anesthetic requirements for spinal and epidural anesthesia remain decreased com-
                                                            pared to nonpregnant patients for 36–48 h after delivery.

                                   Laboratory               Hct; consider coagulation studies with excessive blood loss; other tests as indicated from H&P.

                                   Premedication            Precautions should be taken to ↓ risk of aspiration pneumonitis, as discussed in Cesarean
                                                            Section, p. 836.

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: In many patients, a functioning epidural catheter will be in place, and supplemental
                                   doses of anesthetic may be given to provide adequate analgesia for the surgery. If no epidural is in place and the
                                   patient is hemodynamically stable, a spinal anesthetic may be satisfactory. GA may be required when regional is
                                   contraindicated.
                                   Regional anesthesia:
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Epidural                 Supplemental doses of local anesthetic (1.5–2% lidocaine 10–15 mL) with or without fen-
            Surgery

                                                            tanyl (50–100 mcg) injected incrementally with patient in sitting position (if tolerated) to
                                                            promote perineal anesthesia.

                                   Spinal                   Hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.75% 7.5–10 mg combined with fentanyl 10–20 mcg with
                                                            patient in sitting position, if tolerated. 25–27 ga pencil-point needle to ↓ incidence of
                                                            spinal headache. Anesthesia to T10 is usually adequate. Repair of more extensive lacera-
                                                            tions may require a higher anesthetic dermatomal level and, consequently, a higher dose
                                                            of anesthetic.

                                   Combined                 An alternative technique combining the rapid onset and density of spinal anesthesia with
                                     spinal-                the flexibility of continuous epidural anesthesia (e.g., if necessary to extend the duration
                                     epidural (CSE)         or intensity of the block). Position and prepare patient as for any neuraxial anesthetic. The
                                                            most common technique is the needle-through-needle, which entails after locating the
                                                            epidural space with a 17-ga Tuohy needle, a 25–27 pencil-point needle is then inserted
                                                            through the Tuohy needle into the intrathecal space. An intrathecal dose of 7.5–10 mg of
                                                            bupivacaine is administered and after removal of the spinal needle, the epidural catheter
                                                            is threaded through the Tuohy needle. Secure the epidural catheter and use if needed. (An
                                                            epidural test dose is advisable.)

                                   General anesthesia:

                                   Induction                Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) with propofol (2–3 mg/kg) and succinylcholine
                                                            (1–1.5 mg/kg) for ET intubation. If significant blood loss, ketamine 1.5 mg/kg or etomidate
                                                            0.3 mg/kg is preferred for induction.

                                   Maintenance              Standard maintenance (see p. B-3).

                                   Emergence                Extubation should be delayed until patient is fully awake and protective airway reflexes
                                                            have returned.

===== PAGE 851 =====
Cervical Cerclage—Elective and Emergent                851

                    Blood and fluid            IV: 16–18 ga × 1                            1–1.5 L dextrose-free crystalloid or 500–1000 mL
                       requirements                                                        of colloid immediately prior to regional anesthe-
                                                                                           sia. Blood loss may be extensive until laceration is
                                                                                           repaired.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)

                    Complications              Bleeding

                    Positioning                ✓ Pad pressure points                       To avoid peroneal nerve compression at lateral fibu-
                                               ✓ eyes                                      lar head → foot drop.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Bleeding
                                               Peroneal nerve injury (2° lithotomy         Nerve injury manifests as foot drop and loss of sen-
                                               position)                                   sation over dorsum of foot.

                    Pain                       Neuraxial opioids: 10–20 mcg fen-
                      management               tanyl intrathecally or 50–100 mg
                                               fentanyl epidurally enhances intraop
                                               anesthesia and provides 3–4 h
                                               postop analgesia.
                                               Oral or Parenteral opioids: Oral
                                               opioids (e.g. oxycodone 5–10 mg)            Avoid NSAIDs if significant bleeding
                                               or iv opioids (e.g. morphine 2–4 mg

                                                                                                                                                                Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                               iv up to 20 mg, or hydromorphone
                                               1–2 mg iv) instituted in the recov-

                                                                                                                                                                       Surgery
                                               ery room.

                    Tests                      Hct

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Chia CC, Huang SC: Postpartum hemorrhage of genital tract origin. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 2010; 49:513–14.
                     2. Chia CC, Huang SC: Third- and fourth-degree perineal laceration in vaginal delivery. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 2012; 51:148–52.
                     3. Landy HJ, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstetrics
                        Gynecology 2011; 117(3):627–35.
                     4. Melamed N, et al: Intrapartum cervical lacerations: characteristics, risk factors, and effects on subsequent pregnancies. Am J
                        Obstet Gynecol 2009; 200:388.e1–388.e4.
                     5. Parikh R, Brotzman S, Anasti J: Cervical lacerations: some surprising facts. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007; 11:e17–e18.

                   Cervical Cerclage—Elective and Emergent
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Cervical cerclage is the reinforcement of the cervix to prevent premature cervical dilation in a patient
                   with an incompetent cervix. With cervical incompetence, there is painless dilation of the cervix in the midtrimester of
                   pregnancy. The membranes bulge through the cervix and rupture, followed by delivery of a severely premature infant.
                   An elective cerclage is performed prophylactically before pregnancy or usually after the first trimester of preg-
                   nancy on a patient with a Hx of cervical incompetence. If cerclage is performed before pregnancy, it may need to
                   be removed because of spontaneous abortion or fetal anomalies. It generally is performed between 14 and 16 wk
                   gestation, but may be performed as early as 10 wk gestation. An emergent (rescue) cerclage is performed in
                   a patient who presents in the second trimester with painless cervical dilation and/or effacement. Ultrasound
                   is performed before the procedure to confirm viability and to r/o major congenital anomalies. An emergent

===== PAGE 852 =====
852   c h a p t e r 8.3    Obstetric Surgery

                                   cerclage should not be performed if there is advanced cervical dilation or any evidence of infection, contractions,
                                   or uterine bleeding.
                                   There are two types of cerclage procedures generally performed: the McDonald and the Shirodkar. The McDonald
                                   cerclage is technically easier and the one most commonly performed. A purse-string stitch with nonabsorbable
                                   monofilament suture is placed high around the cervix near the level of the internal os and tied at the twelve o’clock
                                   position. The end of the suture is cut long to facilitate removal. The cerclage is removed electively at term or earlier
                                   if there is rupture of membranes, persistent contractions, bleeding, or evidence of infection. The Shirodkar cer-
                                   clage involves incising the cervix transversely, anteriorly, and posteriorly and advancing the bladder off the cervix.
                                   A nonabsorbable monofilament suture is placed submucosally between the incisions, and the mucosa is closed,
                                   burying the stitch. A Shirodkar cerclage may be left for future pregnancies if abdominal delivery is performed. If
                                   the cervix cannot be adequately accessed through the vagina, cerclage may be attempted through laparotomy or
                                   laparoscopy.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Cervical incompetence

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                Dorsal lithotomy, with use of cane stirrups. Left lateral pelvic tilt (if performed during pregnancy);
                                                            Trendelenburg

                                    Incision                None with McDonald cerclage; transverse cervical with Shirodkar cerclage

                                    Special                 Right-angle retractors; monofilament, nonabsorbable stitch
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                  For emergent cerclage, when prolapsing membranes are present, they may be reduced by filling
                                      considerations        the bladder and/or possibly removing amniotic fluid transabdominally.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Antibiotics             None recommended.

                                    Surgical time           30 min–1 h (may be longer for Shirodkar cerclage)
            Surgery

                                    EBL                     25–50 mL (may be higher with the Shirodkar cerclage)

                                    Postop care             PACU → ward; tocolysis with indomethacin or other agent can be considered.

                                    Mortality               Rare

                                    Morbidity               Morbidity is increased for emergent cerclage, especially when performed later in 2nd trimester.
                                                            The McDonald cerclage is associated with less trauma and bleeding than the Shirodkar
                                                            cerclage.
                                                            Cervical trauma
                                                            Rupture of membranes
                                                            Chorioamnionitis
                                                            Preterm labor
                                                            Spontaneous abortion

                                    Pain score              McDonald—2; Shirodkar—3

                                    ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                    Age range               Reproductive age

                                    Incidence               Not uncommon

                                    Etiology                Cervical trauma from previous vaginal delivery; cervical trauma at time of previous D&C; previous
                                                            treatment for cervical dysplasia (laser therapy, cryotherapy, loop electrosurgical excision proce-
                                                            dure [LEEP]/large loop excision of transitional zone [LLETZ], cone biopsy); congenital anomalies;
                                                            idiopathic

===== PAGE 853 =====
Cervical Cerclage—Elective and Emergent             853

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Cervical insufficiency affects approximately 1% of pregnant women, and approximately 40,000 cerclage placement
                   procedures are preformed annually in the United States. This patient population is generally healthy and little work-
                   up is needed unless otherwise indicated. Cerclage is usually performed between 14–24 wk of pregnancy. When
                   performed after 20 wk, relevant physiologic changes are as discussed under Cesarean Section. Women requiring a
                   cerclage may also have uterine irritability and potentially receive drugs such as b-sympathomimetics (e.g., terbuta-
                   line), nifedipine, or indomethacin.

                    Laboratory                Hct; other tests as indicated from H&P

                    Premedication             None usually, but the significantly anxious patient may benefit from midazolam (0.5–2 mg).
                                              Avoid diazepam during the period of organogenesis (may → cleft lip). If >18 wk gestation, pre-
                                              cautions should be taken to decrease risk of aspiration pneumonitis, as discussed in Cesarean
                                              Section, p. 836.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Drug exposure during the critical period of organogenesis (15–56 d) should be minimized,
                   although no particular anesthetic techniques or agents have proven teratogenic in humans. Although N2O is terato-
                   genic in rodents, there is no evidence of human teratogenicity when used for cervical cerclage or other operations.
                   Ensure adequate uteroplacental perfusion and fetal oxygenation by maintaining normal maternal BP and oxyhe-
                   moglobin saturation. Use left uterine displacement after 20 wk gestation. Maternal hyperventilation and IPPV may
                   diminish uteroplacental and umbilical blood flow. Monitoring FHR may permit optimization of fetal well-being by

                                                                                                                                                         Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   adjustment of maternal blood pressure, oxygenation, or position. Spinal anesthesia is ideal as it minimizes fetal drug
                   exposure and provides good operating conditions. Risk of headache is low with the use of 25–27 gauge pencil-point

                                                                                                                                                                Surgery
                   needles (e.g., Sprotte, Whitacre). Epidural anesthesia is an appropriate alternative for this procedure. GA may be re-
                   quired if regional anesthesia is contraindicated or if uterine relaxation is desired to facilitate cerclage placement (e.g.,
                   increased uterine tone with bulging fetal membranes).
                   Regional anesthesia:

                    Spinal                    Hyperbaric bupivacaine 7.5–10 mg ± fentanyl 10–20 mcg. Position patient to obtain T8–T10
                                              block. Monitor BP every min until stable, then every 3–5 min. Treat ↓ in BP below baseline
                                              with fluids and a vasopressor (e.g., phenylephrine 50–100 mcg or ephedrine 5–10 mg iv).

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                 Standard induction (see p. B-2). If > 16–18 wk gestation, rapid-sequence induction is indi-
                                              cated (see p. B-5).

                    Maintenance               Standard maintenance (p. B-3). If < 16–18 wk gestation, use of LMA or mask anesthesia
                                              with either O2/N2O/volatile agent/opioid or propofol infusion is appropriate. If > 16–18 wk
                                              gestation, ET intubation will be necessary.

                    Emergence                 If > 16–18 wk gestation, extubate patient when fully awake and protective airway reflexes
                                              have returned.

                    Blood and fluid           Minimal blood loss                           Fluid pre-loading (prior to regional anesthesia)
                       requirements           IV: 18 ga × 1                                or co-loading (at time of spinal) with 1–1.5 L
                                                                                           dextrose-free crystalloid may be beneficial in
                                                                                           decreasing spinal hypotension.

                    Monitoring                Standard monitors (see p. B-1)
                                              ±FHR monitor                                 Consider FHR monitoring for viable fetuses and
                                                                                           in earlier gestation, as the FHR may indicate
                                                                                           inadequate placental perfusion and can guide
                                                                                           BP management.

===== PAGE 854 =====
854   c h a p t e r 8.3      Obstetric Surgery

                                   Positioning                 Left uterine displacement, if > 20 wk           Lithotomy positioning:
                                                               gestation                                       * NB: peroneal nerve compression at lateral fib-
                                                               ✓ and pad pressure points                       ular head → foot drop.
                                                               ✓ eyes

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Preterm labor                                   Observe for preterm labor in recovery area.
                                                               Hypotension                                     Tocolytic agents b-adrenergic agents) given to
                                                                                                               inhibit uterine contractions can cause maternal
                                                                                                               dysrhythmias or ↓ BP.
                                                               Peroneal nerve injury                           Manifests as foot drop and loss of sensation over
                                                                                                               dorsum of foot.

                                   Pain                        Intraspinal opioids: 10–20 mcg                  Intrathecal fentanyl given with spinal improves
                                     management                fentanyl                                        intraop analgesia and provides several hours of
                                                               Parenteral opioids: iv opioids (e.g.,           postop analgesia.
                                                               fentanyl 50–100 mcg iv, morphine 2–4
                                                               mg iv, or hydromorphone 1–2 mg)
                                                               instituted in the recovery room.
                                                               Oral analgesics: NSAIDS (e.g., ibu-
                                                               profen) should not be prescribed for
                                                               analgesia during pregnancy (cardiopul-
                                                               monary and renal effects in developing
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                               fetus). Acetaminophen ± oxycodone
                                                               (or equivalent oral narcotics), once
            Surgery

                                                               patient can tolerate oral medication.

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cervical Cerclage, Prophylactic. ACOG Criteria, Set 17. American
                                        College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Washington: 1996.
                                     2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cervical Cerclage, Therapeutic. ACOG Criteria, Set 18. American
                                        College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Washington: 1996.
                                     3. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cervical insufficiency. ACOG Practice Bulletin, No. 48. Int J Gynecol
                                        Obstet 2004; 85:81–9.
                                     4. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 474.
                                        Obstet Gynecol 2011; 117:420–1.
                                     5. Berghella V, Seibel-Seamon J: Contemporary use of the cervical cerclage. Clin Obstet Gynecol 2007; 50:468–77.
                                     6. Drassinower D, et al: Perioperative complications of history-indicated and ultrasound indicated cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet
                                        Gynecol 2011; 205:531–5.
                                     7. Goodman S: Anesthesia for nonobstetric surgery in the pregnant patient. Semin Perinatol 2002; 26(2):136–45.
                                     8. Koduri O, et al: Effect of cerclage on cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 2011; 28:395–98.
                                     9. Lee G, et al: Spread of subarachnoid sensory block with hyperbaric bupivacaine in second trimester of pregnancy. J Clin Anes
                                        2009; 21:482–85.
                                    10. Rosen MA: Management of anesthesia for the pregnant surgical patient. Anesthesiology 1999; 91:1159–63.

                                   Removal of Retained Placenta
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: In most deliveries, the placenta is easily removed with gentle cord traction and uterine massage. If,
                                   after 30 min, the placenta remains undelivered, manual removal, following either parenteral analgesia or GA, must
                                   be initiated. NTG (100–200 mcg iv or 0.4 mg sublingually) may induce uterine relaxation during manual removal.

===== PAGE 855 =====
Removal of Retained Placenta   855

                   A possible alternative to manual removal involves injection of 10 mL of oxytocin (10 U/mL) into the umbilical vein;
                   however, the success of this procedure is unpredictable. A retained placental fragment may cause immediate or late
                   postpartum hemorrhage. An ultrasound evaluation of the uterus may help in the detection of a retained fragment.
                   If retained products are found, curettage is recommended. Frequently, the retained product will already have been
                   flushed out of the uterus by brisk bleeding. In such cases, iv oxytocin, rectal misoprostol, im prostaglandins, or
                   methylergonovine may be administered to contract the uterus prior to curettage.
                   Bleeding from a retained placenta or fragment is frequently brisk, so the anesthesiologist must be ready to administer
                   iv fluids and O2 and to correct any coagulopathy. Cross-matched blood must be available. Placenta accreta, if exten-
                   sive, can cause profuse bleeding at delivery, and a hysterectomy is often necessary.
                   Oxytocin 20–40 U in 1000 mL of LR should be administered at a rate sufficient to maintain uterine tone after manual
                   removal of the placenta or after sharp/suction curettage of a retained placental fragment.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Retained placenta

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position               Dorsal lithotomy

                     Incision               None

                     Special                Banjo curette/suction cannula
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                 IV fluids; use of blood and blood products, as needed; monitoring of VS
                       considerations

                     Antibiotics            Cefazolin 1 g iv q 8 h; 3 total doses

                                                                                                                                                     Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Surgical time          30 min

                     EBL                    300–900 mL

                                                                                                                                                            Surgery
                     Postop care            PACU → ward. Monitor for infection and further bleeding.

                     Mortality              Rare

                     Morbidity              Hemorrhage
                                            Endometritis
                                            Uterine perforation 2° curettage
                                            Asherman’s syndrome
                                            Transfusion-related morbidity (hepatitis, HIV, transfusion reactions)

                     Pain score             5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range              Reproductive age

                     Incidence              0.25–0.8% of vaginal deliveries

                     Etiology               Unknown

                     Associated             Placenta accreta; avulsed cotyledon; succenturiate lobe
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   The incidence of retained placenta is about 1–3%. The degree of urgency associated with these patients may vary
                   dramatically. Some patients may be hemodynamically unstable as a result of heavy and/or persistent bleeding in
                   the postpartum period; others may have a retained placenta with minimal bleeding. Delays in delivery of placenta

===== PAGE 856 =====
856   c h a p t e r 8.3    Obstetric Surgery

                                   increases the risk of significant postpartum hemorrhage. Evaluation of the patient in the OR to optimize monitoring,
                                   anesthetic options, and surgical exposure is essential.

                                   Respiratory              Laryngeal edema may persist in postpartum patients after protracted expulsive efforts dur-
                                                            ing labor and increases the likelihood of difficult intubation.
                                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                                   Cardiovascular           Volume status should be carefully assessed and resuscitation started early. Restore intra-
                                                            vascular volume prior to institution of analgesia or anesthesia. Neuraxial anesthesia (either
                                                            spinal or extension of existing lumbar epidural blockade) may aggravate hypovolemia.
                                                            Consider possibility of placenta accreta (placental villi are attached to myometrium), espe-
                                                            cially if placenta is difficult to remove, and expect greater blood loss.

                                   Gastrointestinal         Postpartum patients continue to be at risk for acid aspiration, although it is not known
                                                            exactly when normal GI function returns. Precautions for prevention of acid aspiration
                                                            should be followed as discussed in Cesarean Section, p. 836.

                                   Neurological             Local anesthetic requirements for neuraxial anesthesia remain decreased compared to
                                                            nonpregnant patients for 36–48 h after delivery.

                                   Hematologic              Coagulopathy can develop rapidly with retained placenta, especially if bleeding is severe
                                                            and persistent.
                                                            Tests: Hct, PT, PTT, Plt, Fibrinogen, as indicated.

                                   Laboratory               Other tests as indicated from H&P. T&C for 2–4 U+ if time permits. Emergency transfu-
                                                            sion with Type O(-) or type-specific blood may be necessary. If available, consider activa-
                                                            tion of MTP if severe hemorrhage, significant coagulopathy, unstable hemodynamics, and/
                                                            or if there are significant delays in receiving cross-matched blood.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   Premedication            Precaution should be taken to decrease risk of aspiration, as discussed in Cesarean Section,
                                                            p. 836. Anxiolysis (e.g., midazolam 0.5–2 mg iv) may be indicated.
            Surgery

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique: There are several anesthesia options (MAC/GA/neuraxial technique) for the removal of a
                                   retained placenta depending on the urgency and severity. MAC may be sufficient to enable the obstetrician to manu-
                                   ally extract the placenta. If better analgesia and additional uterine relaxation are needed, however, then GA may be
                                   required. If intravascular volume has been restored and an existing labor epidural catheter is in place, the sensory
                                   block can be extended to provide adequate anesthesia. Initiating spinal anesthesia is also an option if intravascular
                                   volume status is adequate, there is no significant active bleeding, and time permits. Small doses of iv opioids and
                                   midazolam sometimes provide sufficient analgesia and sedation to allow removal of a retained placenta without
                                   compromising maternal safety. If this proves inadequate or hemorrhage is severe, however, GA with ET intubation
                                   is required. NTG in 100 mcg iv boluses or sublingual NTG 400 mcg provides uterine relaxation and may aid delivery
                                   of a retained placenta in normovolemic patients.
                                   Regional anesthesia:

                                   Spinal                   For technique and monitoring of spinal anesthesia, see Cesarean Section, p. 838. Hyper-
                                                            baric bupivacaine 7.5–10 mg, with or without fentanyl 10–20 mg, to obtain T8 level of
                                                            anesthesia.

                                   Epidural                 For technique and monitoring, see Cesarean Section, p. 838. Administer increments of
                                                            2% lidocaine (with 1:200,000 epinephrine and bicarbonate) or 3% 2-chloroprocaine until
                                                            block level adequate. Additional local anesthetic and fentanyl 50–100 mcg can be adminis-
                                                            tered epidurally as needed to ensure adequate level of anesthesia.

                                   MAC                      Titrate small doses of opioids (e.g., fentanyl 25–50 mcg) and midazolam 0.5–2.0 mg or
                                                            ketamine 0.1–0.2 mg/kg. Sedation and analgesia should be titrated carefully, due to the
                                                            potential risk of pulmonary aspiration in the parturient with an unprotected airway.
                                                            Ensure patient is awake and responsive throughout. Consider NTG 100 mcg iv for uterine
                                                            relaxation, repeated as necessary to obtain the desired effect. Transient ↓ BP may follow
                                                            vasodilation due to NTG and should be treated with volume and pressors if necessary.

===== PAGE 857 =====
Removal of Retained Placenta           857

                   General anesthesia:

                    Induction                  Preoxygenation, rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure (see p. B-5), and hydra-
                                               tion, as discussed in Cesarean Section. Ketamine (1 mg/kg) is preferred for induction of
                                               hypotensive patient; but, in larger doses (> 1.5 mg/kg), it theoretically may increase uterine
                                               tone and make removal of placenta more difficult. Etomidate 0.2–0.4 mg/kg is also a suit-
                                               able induction agent in this setting.

                    Maintenance                Anesthesia with N2O/O2 + volatile + opioid often permits delivery of placenta. If uterine
                                               relaxation is necessary, administer volatile agent (> 1.5 MAC) or NTG (see above) until
                                               uterine tone decreases.

                    Emergence                  Extubation should be delayed until patient is fully awake and protective airway reflexes
                                               have returned.

                    Blood and fluid            Anticipate large blood loss            1–1.5 L NS/LR or colloid 500 mL to maintain BP or
                       requirements            IV: 16–18 ga × 1–2                     minimize hypotension after neuraxial anesthesia.
                                                                                      Treat ↓ BP with fluids and pressors and by decreasing
                                                                                      concentration of volatile agent. Surgery is usually brief;
                                                                                      additional muscle relaxation not usually necessary.

                    Monitoring                 Standard monitors (see p. B-1)

                    Complications              Bleeding                               Oxytocin is the first line uterotonic agent. Consider
                                               Uterine atony                          small boluses 1–3U in addition to an infusion (e.g.,
                                                                                      30–60 U in 500–1000 mL NS at 250–500 mL/hr).
                                                                                      Second line uterotonics include methylergonovine 0.2
                                                                                      mg im (may →↑ BP), PGF2α (Hemabate) 250 mcg im/

                                                                                                                                                             Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                      intrauterine (may → cardiovascular collapse/broncho-
                                                                                      spasm) and/or misoprostol (cytotec) 600–1200 mg

                                                                                                                                                                    Surgery
                                                                                      rectal/sublingual.

                    Positioning                                                       *NB: peroneal nerve compression at lateral fibular
                                                                                      head → foot drop.

                         POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications              Peroneal nerve injury (2° lithotomy           Nerve injury manifested as foot drop and loss of
                                               position)                                     sensation over dorsum of foot.
                                               Bleeding                                      See uterine atony, above.

                    Pain                       Parenteral: Opioids (e.g., fentanyl
                      management               50–100 mcg iv; titrated to effect)
                                               instituted in recovery room. Avoid
                                               NSAIDs in patients with persistent
                                               or significant bleeding. Administer
                                               acetaminophen and oral opioids (e.g.,
                                               oxycodone 5–10 mg) for postoperative
                                               pain management.

                    Tests                      Hct

                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Abdel-Aleem H, et al: Tocolysis for management of retained placenta. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 19(1):CD007708.
                     2. Ahonen J, et al: Management of post-partum hemorrhage. Acta Anesthesiol Scand 2010; 54(10):1164–78.
                     3. Chedraui P, Insuasti D: Intravenous nitroglycerin in the management of retained placenta. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2003;
                        56(2):61–4.
                     4. Dyer RA, Butwick AJ, Caravalho B: Oxytocin for labor and caesarean delivery: implications for the anesthesiologist. Current
                        Opinion in Anesthesiology 2011; 24:255–61.

===== PAGE 858 =====
858   c h a p t e r 8.3      Obstetric Surgery

                                     5. Jha S, Chiu J, Yeo I: Intravenous nitroglycerine versus general anaesthesia for placental extraction—a sequential comparison.
                                        Med Sci Monit 2003; 9(7):CS63–6.
                                     6. Mercier FJ, Van de Velde M: Major obstetric hemorrhage. Anesthesiology Clin 2008; 26:53–66.
                                     7. Weeks A: The retained placenta. Best Prac Res Clin Obstet Gyn 2008; 22(6):1103–17.
                                     8. Yoo K, et al: The effects of volatile anesthetics on spontaneous contractility of isolated human pregnant uterine muscle:
                                        a comparison among sevolfurane, desflurane, isoflurane, and halothane. Anesth Analg 2006; 103(2):443–47.

                                   Management of Uterine Inversion
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Uterine inversion is associated with fundal implantation of the placenta whereby a thinning of the uter-
                                   ine wall, together with placental separation, causes an invagination of the myometrium, resulting in inversion. Vigor-
                                   ous fundal pressure or cord traction also can contribute to uterine inversion, which can be complete or incomplete.
                                   Complete inversion results in the inverted fundus extending beyond the cervix and appearing at the vaginal introitus,
                                   whereas in an incompletely inverted uterus, the fundus does not extend beyond the external cervical os. Uterine
                                   inversion can cause hemorrhage and shock out of proportion to observed bleeding and must be managed as an obstet-
                                   rical emergency. An anesthesiologist must be called to the delivery room as soon as a diagnosis of uterine inversion
                                   is made. The ready availability of GA is paramount. IV access with two infusion systems and appropriate fluid resus-
                                   citation must be initiated emergently. Blood and blood products should be available for administration as indicated.
                                   Frequently, uterine replacement can be accomplished with iv tocolytics, such as terbutaline, MgSO4, and, more
                                   recently, NTG; however, GA with a volatile agent may be necessary. Delay in treatment of uterine inversion is
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   associated with increased blood loss. Initiate iv resuscitation and iv tocolytics (or anesthesia). Three primary meth-
                                   ods for uterine replacement are the Johnson, Huntington and Haultain procedures. Normally, the Johnson method
            Surgery

                                   is attempted first. Leave the placenta attached. Cup the inverted fundus in the palm of the hand, elevate the inverted
                                   prolapsed fundus. Apply persistent upward pressure to the ring of inversion with the tip of the operator’s fingers.
                                   Once the fundus is replaced, keep a fist inside the uterus and apply external fundal massage. Continue uterotonic
                                   treatments. Attempt manual removal of the placenta at this stage. Watch for reinversion. Laparotomy must be per-
                                   formed if uterine replacement with the Johnson method is unsuccessful. The Huntington procedure involves grasp-
                                   ing the round ligaments and applying upward traction on them, while an assistant exerts upward pressure on the
                                   uterus via a hand in the vagina. If the inverted uterus is trapped below the cervical ring, the Haultain procedure
                                   is used. This procedure involves making a longitudinal fundal incision posteriorly to allow easier reinversion of the
                                   fundus. Hydrostatic and laparoscopic reduction of uterine inversion have also been described.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Uterine inversion

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
                                                                 Manual Reinversion                                        Huntington/Haultain

                                    Position                     Dorsal lithotomy                                          Supine

                                    Incision                     None                                                      Pfannenstiel’s or midline longitudinal

                                    Unique considerations        Prompt O2 and iv fluid resuscitation; use of blood        ⇐
                                                                 and blood products as necessary.

                                    Antibiotics                  Cefazolin 1 g iv q 8 h; total 3 doses                     ⇐

                                    Surgical time                30 min                                                    1–2 h

                                    EBL                          150–4000 mL                                               ⇐

                                    Postop care                  ±ICU. ARDS may necessitate mechanical ventila-            ⇐
                                                                 tion. Monitor for acute renal failure 2° hypoxia and
                                                                 hypovolemia.

===== PAGE 859 =====
Management of Uterine Inversion      859

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES (cont’d)
                     Mortality                Rare                                                    ⇐

                     Morbidity                Febrile morbidity                                       ⇐
                                              Clinical shock                                          ⇐
                                              Infectious morbidity from blood transfusion             ⇐

                     Pain score               5                                                       7

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range             Reproductive age

                     Incidence             1/2000–6000 deliveries

                     Etiology              Unknown

                     Associated            Fundal implantation of the placenta; primiparity; intrapartum oxytocin; placenta accreta; therapy
                       conditions          of preeclampsia with MgSO4; macrosomic fetus

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                         PREOPERATIVE
                   Uterine inversion is an obstetric emergency as it usually is accompanied by hemorrhage and shock. Management
                   requires prompt recognition and action. These patients often present in shock out of proportion to blood loss be-

                                                                                                                                                      Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   cause of the parasympathetic effect of traction on the ligaments supporting the uterus. Immediate resuscitation
                   almost always is necessary. Blood loss varies from 500–2500 mL and is easily underestimated. Patient condition will

                                                                                                                                                             Surgery
                   improve as soon as the uterus is replaced, and therefore surgical treatment should not be delayed. Consider activa-
                   tion of MTP if available.

                    Respiratory             FRC returns to normal almost immediately after delivery.
                                            Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular          Massive hemorrhage and pain usually present with complete inversion. Prior to induction,
                                            insert large-bore iv and rapidly begin fluid resuscitation to treat ↓ BP. Blood transfusion
                                            may be necessary, although is seldom available until after surgery.

                    Gastrointestinal        Postpartum patients continue to be at risk for acid aspiration, although it is not known
                                            exactly when normal GI function returns. Precautions for prevention of acid aspiration
                                            should be followed as discussed in Cesarean Section, p. 836.

                    Neurological            Local anesthetic requirements for neuraxial anesthesia remain decreased compared to
                                            nonpregnant patients for 36–48 h after delivery.

                    Laboratory              Hct; Plt; consider coagulation studies and other tests as indicated from H&P. T&C for
                                            2–4 U PRBC; keep 2 U ahead.

                    Premedication           Na citrate 30 mL po within 30 min of induction. If time permits, other agents to decrease
                                            risk of aspiration pneumonitis, as discussed in Cesarean Section, p. 836.

                        INTRAOPERATIVE
                   Anesthetic technique: Attempted uterine replacement and induction of anesthesia should not await intra-
                   vascular volume replacement. Bleeding usually stops when uterus is replaced. Uterotonic therapy should be dis-
                   continued, and iv NTG (50–200 mcg) will often provide uterine relaxation to facilitate replacement, and can be
                   administered in the labor suite. Other tocolytics, such as terbutaline or Mg++, also may assist in restoration of
                   the uterine fundus. Do not give oxytocin before uterine replacement. If regional anesthesia (e.g., epidural or

===== PAGE 860 =====
860   c h a p t e r 8.3      Obstetric Surgery

                                   spinal) was used for delivery, replacement of uterus may be accomplished with little further anesthetic interven-
                                   tion, with or without NTG. If regional anesthesia was not used for delivery, iv analgesia with small doses of fentanyl
                                   (25–50 mcg iv) or ketamine (10–20 mg iv) may allow reduction. Sometimes, however, GETA is required, often
                                   with increasing concentrations of volatile agents to facilitate uterine replacement. GETA also provides the
                                   opportunity for a laparotomy to correct the inversion if other measures fail.

                                   Induction                   Rapid-sequence induction (see p. B-5) with ketamine (1.0 mg/kg) or etomidate (0.3 mg/kg)
                                                               preferred. Higher dose of ketamine may adversely increase uterine tone.

                                   Maintenance                 Isoflurane and sevoflurate are effective uterine relaxants, but sevoflurane is most rapidly
                                                               eliminated. ↓ BP should be treated with fluids + vasopressors and transfusion as necessary.

                                   Emergence                   Extubation should be delayed until patient is fully awake and protective airway reflexes
                                                               have returned.

                                   Blood and fluid             Significant blood loss                         Possible continued blood loss after reduction of
                                      requirements             IV: 16–18 ga × 1 or 2                          uterus due to uterine atony.

                                   Monitoring                  Standard monitors (see p. B-1)                 Arterial line may be useful, if time allows.

                                   Positioning                 ✓ and pad pressure points
                                                               ✓ eyes

                                   Complications               Uterine atony                                  Rx:↓ volatile anesthetic concentrations. Oxyto-
                                                               Massive blood loss                             cin infusion, uterine massage, ± methylergono-
                                                                                                              vine 0.2 mg im (may ↑ BP), PGF2α (Hemabate)
                                                                                                              250 mcg/im/intrauterine (may → cardiovascular
                                                                                                              collapse/bronchospasm); cytotec (misoprostol)
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                                                                              600–1200 mg rectal/sublingual
            Surgery

                                        POSTOPERATIVE

                                   Complications               Bleeding

                                   Pain                        Oral or parenteral opioids: oral opioids (e.g., oxycodone 5–10 mg) or iv opioids (e.g.,
                                     management                morphine 2–4 mg iv, up to 20 mg; hydromorphone 1–2 mg iv) instituted in the recovery
                                                               room. Avoid NSAIDS if significant bleeding.

                                   Tests                       Hct

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG practice bulletin: postpartum hemorrhage. No 76, 2006
                                        (replaces No 243, 1998 and No 143, 1990). Obstet Gynecol 2006; 108(4)1039–47.
                                     2. Duri D, et al: Acute postpartum uterine inversion: report of two cases. Int J Obstet Anesth 2008; 17:83–4.
                                     3. Hostetler DR, Bosworth MF: Uterine inversion: a life threatening obstetric emergency. J Am Board Fam Pract 2000; 13(2):
                                        120–3.
                                     4. Marshall N, Catling S: Cardiac arrest due to uterine inversion during caesarean section. Int J Obstet Anesth 2009; 10:231–4.
                                     5. Mirza F, Gaddipati S: Obstetric emergencies. J Semin Perinatol 2009; 1:97–103.
                                     6. Pinder A, Dresner M: Massive obstetric hemorrhage. Curr Anesth Crit Care 2005; 16:181–8.
                                     7. Riley ET, Flanagan B, Cohen SE, et al: Intravenous nitroglycerin: a potent relaxant for emergency obstetrical procedures.
                                        Review of literature and reports of 3 cases. Int J Obstet Anesth 1996; 5:264–8.
                                     8. Tan KH, Luddin NS: Hydrostatic reduction of acute uterine inversion. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2005; 1:63–4.
                                     9. Witteveen T, et al: Puerperal uterine inversion in the Netherlands: a nationwide cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
                                        2012; 1–11.

===== PAGE 861 =====
c h a p t e r

                                      8.4 Laparoscopic
                                           Procedures
                                           for Gynecologic
                                           Surgery

                                           surgeons
                                           Camran R. Nezhat, MD, FACOG, FACS
                                           Jacqualin Miller, MD
                                           Amanda Stevens, MD
                                           Chandhana Paka, MD
                                           Elizabeth Buescher, MD
                                           M. Ali Parsa, MD, FACOG

                                           anesthesiologist
                                           Clifford A. Schmiesing, MD

===== PAGE 862 =====
Laparoscopic Surgery for Endometriosis
                                       SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma in ectopic locations.
                                   There are numerous theories about the etiology of endometriosis, including (a) the peritoneal cavity is seeded with
                                   cells which are transported via the fallopian tubes during menses; (b) totipotent cells in the peritoneal cavity are
                                   transformed by hormonal exposure into endometrial cells; (c) endometrial cells are transported intravascularly or
                                   via lymphatics to ectopic sites, where they respond to hormonal stimuli (this theory has been used to explain the
                                   presence of endometriosis in the brain and pleura); (d) failure of natural killer cells to eliminate ectopic endometrial
                                   cells, which is suggested by decreased cytotoxic response of the immune system; and (e) it is an inherited disorder.
                                   Intervention usually is indicated for intractable pain, infertility, or impaired function of the gastrointestinal (GI) or
                                   genitourinary (GU) tracts or thoracic cavity. GU endometriosis may range from superficial involvement of perito-
                                   neum overlying the ureters and bladder to deep infiltrating endometriosis penetrating through to bladder mucosa.
                                   Scarring and fibrosis can cause ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis with renal insufficiency. Patients with GI
                                   endometriosis may have thickening of the rectovaginal septum, suggesting obliteration of the posterior cul-de-sac
                                   or rectosigmoid involvement. Adhesions may make rectovaginal examination difficult or painful. Pelvic structures
                                   may be immobile (known as “frozen pelvis”), suggesting adhesions are fixing bowel or bladder to the uterus. In
                                   severe cases of GI endometriosis, sigmoidoscopy should be performed to r/o malignancy and to determine whether
                                    endometriosis has penetrated through to the bowel mucosa.
                                   Laparoscopy (Fig. 8.4-1) is the most appropriate surgical technique for the diagnosis and treatment of endometriosis.
                                   Data from animal and clinical studies suggest laparoscopic surgery is more effective for adhesiolysis, causes fewer de
                                   novo adhesions than laparotomy, and reduces impairment of tuboovarian function. Special consideration must be given
                                   to the patient’s past history of abdominal or pelvic surgery, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and endometriosis. These
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   factors will affect the choice of surgical approach. Conservative surgery is indicated for women who desire pregnancy
                                   and whose disease is responsible for their symptoms of pain or infertility. Surgery improves fertility and offers at least
            Surgery

                                   temporary pain relief. Bilateral oophorectomy might be necessary to eliminate the estrogen that sustains and stimulates
                                   the ectopic endometrium. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) may be indicated for patients
                                   with severe symptoms who have not responded to medical or conservative surgical treatment and who do not desire
                                   fertility (please see Laparoscopic Hysterectomy, p. 869).
                                   Pelvic Endometriosis: A Foley catheter should be placed prior to the beginning of the procedures to allow continu-
                                   ous drainage of the bladder, thereby reducing the likelihood of trocar injury to the bladder. In a patient with no his-
                                   tory of pelvic surgery, the direct trocar insertion method may be used with an intraumbilical incision because this is
                                   the anatomical area closest to the fascia and peritoneum and involves the least risk of injury to retroperitoneal struc-
                                   tures. Once the incision is made, towel clips on either side of the umbilicus are placed, the abdominal wall is lifted
                                   up, and the trocar is placed through the skin incision. Using an intraumbilical incision and inserting the trocar at 90°
                                   facilitates access to the abdominal cavity and decreases the risk of injury to the major pelvic vessels. This technique
                                   of direct trocar insertion may not be suitable for patients who have had prior laparotomy or laparoscopy because of
                                   risk of adhesions. Another method of entry uses the Veress needle. An intraumbilical incision is made, the abdominal
                                   wall is lifted, and the Veress needle is inserted through the skin incision while connected to a high flow CO2 insuffla-
                                   tion. This method allows for the abdomen to be insufflated prior to trocar placement. The patient is then placed in
                                   steep Trendelenburg position. Two lateral 5-mm ports are placed about 2 cm cephalad and 2 cm medial to the ante-
                                   rior superior iliac spine under direct visualization, taking care to avoid the inferior epigastric vessels. A third 5-mm
                                   port is placed 2–3 cm above the pubic symphysis, again under direct visualization. The suction irrigator, a blunt
                                   laparoscopic grasper, and the bipolar cautery are placed into trocars. Filmy adhesions of the bowel or omentum to the
                                   anterior abdominal wall or uterus are lysed using CO2 laser, bipolar cautery, monopolar scissors, or hydrodissection.
                                   Treatment of peritoneal endometriosis ranges from laser ablation of superficial peritoneal implants to excision and
                                   dissection of deeply embedded, fibrotic areas. Scarring from endometriosis that has penetrated the peritoneum to
                                   involve deeper structures destroys normal surgical planes and distorts anatomical relationships, and patients are at
                                   risk for accidental ureteral or vascular injury at the time of surgery. Identifications of ureters and blood vessels are
                                   critical prior to treatment of the pelvic sidewall disease. Although different modalities have been used, hydrodissec-
                                   tion and high-power superpulse or ultrapulse CO2 lasers are the best option for endometriosis treatment. Because
                                   the CO2 laser does not penetrate water, this fluid backstop allows the surgeons to work on selected tissue with a
                                   greater safety margin.

                             862

===== PAGE 863 =====
Laparoscopic Surgery for Endometriosis           863

                                  Inferior                                                                          Probe retractor
                                epigastric

                                                                      Pubic ramus
                                      Uterus                                                                        Round ligament

                                                                                                                    External iliac
                                                                                                                    artery and vein
                                                                                                                    Ovarian
                                                                                                                    ligament

                                                                                                                    Ovary
                            Sacrouterine
                                ligament                                                                            Fallopian tube

                                                                                                                    Internal iliac
                                                                                                                    artery and vein

                                                                                                                    Ureter

                                                                                                                    Ovarian
                                                                                                                    artery and vein
                                      Colon

                                                                                                                                                       Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                    Common iliac
                                                                                                                    artery and vein

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                                                Figure 8.4-1. Laparoscopic view of the female pelvis.

                   Ovarian endometriosis: Type 1 endometrioma < 2 cm are resected using laser or bipolar coagulation. Larger Type
                   I endometriomas may require excision using laparoscopic graspers and scissors., for Type II endometriomas, the
                   procedure begins with lysis of periovarian adhesions using CO2 laser or monopolar scissors. The ovarian cortex is
                   evaluated, the endometrioma is identified, the cyst wall is perforated, and an irrigation device is inserted to assess the
                   cyst contents and wall. Suspicious areas are biopsied and sent to pathology. A plane is developed between the cyst
                   wall and ovary by grasping the wall and separating it from ovarian stroma. Difficult areas where endometriosis has
                   embedded through the cyst wall, disrupting planes, require hydrodissection with vasopressin solution and bipolar
                   cautery to control bleeding in the ovarian bed. In some cases, it is necessary to remove a portion of the ovary attached
                   to the cyst wall until a plane can be found. Redundant ovarian tissue is approximated with low power laser or elec-
                   trosurgery to avoid adhesions. Suturing should be avoided if possible but, if needed, can be used to close the defect.
                   Bladder endometriosis: If the lesions are superficial, hydrodissection and vaporization are adequate for treatment.
                   Using hydrodissection, the areolar tissue between the serosa and muscularis beneath the implants is dissected. The
                   lesion is circumscribed with the CO2 laser and fluid is injected into the resulting defect. The lesion is grasped and
                   dissected with the laser. Traction allows the small blood vessels supplying the surrounding tissue to be coagulated as
                   the lesion is resected. Frequent irrigation is necessary to remove char, ascertain the depth of vaporization, and ensure
                   that the lesion does not involve the muscularis or mucosa. Endometriosis extending to the muscularis but without
                   mucosal involvement can be treated laparoscopically, and any residual or deeper lesions may be treated success-
                   fully with hormonal therapy. When endometriosis involves full bladder wall thickness, the lesion is excised and the
                   bladder is reconstructed in one later. Cystoscopy is performed simultaneously, and bilateral ureteral stents may be
                   inserted for ureteral identification. The lesion is excised by first holding the bladder dome near midline with laparo-
                   scopic graspers. An incision is made 5 mm beyond the lesion with the CO2 laser. The specimen is completely excised
                   and removed from the abdominal cavity. CO2 is used to distend the bladder, allowing observation of its interior. After
                   again identifying the ureters and examining the bladder mucosa, the bladder is closed with laparoscopic suturing.
                   Cystoscopy is performed to identify any leaks; the duration of laparoscopic segmental cystotomy is about 35 min.

===== PAGE 864 =====
864   c h a p t e r 8.4    Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   Patients are discharged the same day and instructed to take antibiotics while an indwelling catheter is present. The
                                   catheter is removed 7–14 days later, and a cystogram or iv contrast computed tomography scan is performed.
                                   Appendectomy: Appendix (a common site for endometriosis) is identified, mobilized, and examined laparoscopi-
                                   cally. If adhesions are present they are lysed using either the CO2 laser or laparoscopic scissors. The meso-appendix is
                                   then coagulated using laparoscopic bipolar cautery and scissors or a vessel-sealing device. At this time a laparoscopic
                                   GI stapler is introduced through a 10- to 12-mm port and placed across the meso-appendix and appendix. It is ex-
                                   tremely important to closely examine the placement of the stapler and its proximity to the rectum. After adequate
                                   placement is observed, the entire appendix and meso-appendix are stapled and cut in a single motion. The specimen
                                   is removed, and the staple line is inspected for hemostasis. Copious amounts of irrigation fluid are used to minimize
                                   bacterial contamination.
                                   Thoracic endometriosis: Laparoscopically identified endometrial lesions on the diaphragm can be visualized and
                                   treated with hydrodissection and CO2 laser fulguration, but this requires an experienced gynecologist and thoracic
                                   surgeon. If large lesions are visualized then video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is the preferred method of
                                   treatment. Lesions found during VATS are treated either by bipolar diathermy, CO2 laser, or sharp dissection.
                                   Robotic assistance: Robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery is relatively new to the field of gynecologic surgery.
                                   The available evidence demonstrates the feasibility and safety of robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery in benign
                                   gynecologic disease, but further studies are needed to define the role of robotics in this field. With the advent of
                                   robotic-assisted surgery, the previously described procedures can be performed with three-dimensional visualization,
                                   improved magnification, and greater operative flexibility. The only major difference is location and sometimes size of
                                   the trocars used for the robotic arms as well as possible increased operative time. Patient positioning is not different
                                   from standard laparoscopy.

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                                            Ovarian Endometriosis Procedure                  Pelvic/GI/GU Endometriosis Procedures
            Surgery

                                    Position                Dorsal lithotomy, legs in stirrups ± steep       ⇐
                                                            Trendelenburg

                                    Incision                Intraumbilical; lateral suprapubic; or midline   ⇐
                                                            suprapubic

                                    Special                 CO2 laser or other cutting instrument; bipolar   ⇐ ± Ureteral stenting, cystoscope,
                                      instrumentation       Kleppinger forceps; suction irrigator, uterine   sigmoidoscope
                                                            manipulator

                                    Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 1g iv before procedure                 ⇐

                                    Surgical time           45 min–3 h, depending on extent of disease       1–4 h

                                    Closing                 Close fascia of all 10–12-mm ports; subcuticu-   ⇐
                                      considerations        lar closure for 5-mm trocar sites

                                    EBL                     Minimal                                          ⇐

                                    Postop care             Mild disease: PACU → home; otherwise,            ⇐
                                                            discharge on POD 1 (peritoneal disease (pain
                                                            control issues)).

                                    Mortality               0.08–0.2/1000                                    ⇐

                                    Morbidity               Overall complication rate: 2.5%                  Urinary tract injury
                                                            Conversion to laparotomy: 0.42%                  ⇐
                                                            VAE (CO2 embolism)
                                                            Peroneal nerve damage
                                                            Vascular damage
                                                            Bowel injury: Rare
                                                            Urinary tract injury: Rare

                                    Pain score              4–8                                              4–8

===== PAGE 865 =====
Laparoscopic Surgery for Ectopic Pregnancy or Adnexal Mass                   865

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Reproductive age                                   20s–40s

                     Incidence                10–15% of all reproductive age women/25%           1–11% of women with known endometriosis
                                              of all gynecologic laparotomies

                     Etiology                 Numerous theories (see above).                     Extensive disseminated endometriosis

                     Associated               Infertility; pelvic pain; bladder or bowel symp-   Pelvic pain; GI or GU symptoms
                       conditions             toms; HTN (2° to urinary tract involvement); GI
                                              tract involvement (3–7%)

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Hysterectomy, p. 869.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Cho JE, Shamshirsaz AH, Nezhat C, et al.: New technologies for reproductive medicine: laparoscopy, endoscopy, robotic
                        surgery and gynecology. A review of the literature. Minerva Ginecol 2010; 62(2):137–67.
                     2. Nezhat C, Lewis M, Kotikela S, et al: Robotic versus standard laparoscopy for the treatment of endometriosis. Fertil Steril
                        2010; 94(7):2758–60.
                     3. Nezhat C, Nezhat F, eds: Nezhat’s Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopy and Hysterectomy. Cambridge University
                        Press, New York: 2013.
                     4. Tinelli A, Malvasi A, Gustapane S, et al: Robotic assisted surgery in gynecology: current insights and future perspectives.
                        Recent Pat Biotechnol 2011; 5(1):12–24.

                                                                                                                                                             Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                    Surgery
                   LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY FOR ECTOPIC PREGNANCY
                   OR ADNEXAL MASS
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Ectopic pregnancy is defined as a pregnancy occurring outside the uterus. The majority of ectopic
                   pregnancies occur in the fallopian tubes (95–97%); the remainder occurs in the cornua (2–4%), ovary (0.1%), cervix
                   (0.1%), or abdomen (0.03%). Ectopic pregnancy remains a leading cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Predis-
                   posing factors include Hx of tubal ligation or other tubal surgery, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), IUD use, and Hx
                   of in vitro fertilization (IVF) or other treatments for infertility. Other associations include developmental anomalies
                   of the Müllerian system, intrauterine polyps, or myomas.
                   Patients present with lower quadrant pain, vaginal bleeding, and an ↑ β-hCG. Treatment options for an asymptomatic
                   ectopic gestation include operative laparoscopy or a trial of medical management with intramuscular methotrexate.
                   In cases where the size of the ectopic pregnancy is too large for conservative medical management (> 3.5 cm), and
                   the patient is hemodynamically stable, operative management is essential. Hypotension or an acute abdomen in the
                   presence of a positive β-hCG value are strongly suggestive of rupture and require expeditious surgical intervention.
                   Access to the abdomen is obtained in the usual fashion (e.g., through a Veress needle or direct-trocar insertion, as
                   described in previous section). Ruptured tubal pregnancies can be treated endoscopically if the bleeding has ceased
                   or can be controlled. Actively bleeding vessels are identified and cauterized, and forced irrigation is used to dislodge
                   clots and trophoblastic tissue. Depending on their size, the products of conception (POCs) are removed through
                   either a 5- or 10-mm trocar sleeve or placed into an endoscopic bag for removal; for larger POCs a minilaparotomy
                   can be performed. Copious irrigation should follow to ensure hemostasis and identify and remove any remaining
                   trophoblastic tissue. Trophoblast is invasive, and residual tissue may implant into bowel, bladder, peritoneum, or
                   other abdominal structures and cause significant future morbidity.
                   For an unruptured ectopic pregnancy, the tube is identified and stabilized using laparoscopic forceps. To minimize
                   bleeding, 5–7 mL of a solution of 50 U vasopressin in 100 mL NS is injected into the mesosalpinx just below the

===== PAGE 866 =====
866   c h a p t e r 8.4     Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   ectopic pregnancy and over the antimesenteric surface of the tubal segment containing the gestation. Intravascular
                                   injection of vasopressin solution can precipitate acute arterial HTN, bradycardia, or even death; therefore, care
                                   must be taken to avoid intravascular injection. A linear incision is made over the thinnest portion of the tube. The
                                   pregnancy usually protrudes through the incision, and forceful irrigation will dislodge the POCs from its implanta-
                                   tion site.
                                   In a ruptured tubal or isthmic pregnancy, resection of the tubal segment containing the gestation is preferable to
                                   salpingostomy. Segmental tubal resection is performed with bipolar cautery, laser sutures, or stapling devices.
                                   Similarly, total salpingectomy can be performed by progressive coagulation and cutting the mesosalpinx, which is
                                   separated from the uterus using bipolar coagulation and scissors or laser. The isolated tube segment containing the
                                   ectopic pregnancy is removed intact or in sectioned parts through the 10-mm trocar sleeve. At the completion of the
                                   procedure, the abdomen is irrigated and inspected, and incisions are closed in the usual fashion.
                                   Hydrosalpinx: A hydrosalpinx is a fluid-filled fallopian tube, which occurs after an inflammatory process (e.g.,
                                   PID, tuboovarian abscess, or endometriosis) damages the serosa and mucosa of the tube. This results in occlu-
                                   sion at the fimbriated end and accumulation of tubular fluid. This can occur unilaterally or bilaterally. Currently,
                                   for women with hydrosalpinges who are to undergo IVF, strong consideration should be made for laparoscopic
                                   salpingectomy prior to IVF treatment. This is the most widely used method for treatment of hydrosalpinges in
                                   the group of infertile women undergoing IVF. The procedure is performed as described earlier for resection of a
                                   tubal segment.
                                   Tuboovarian Abscess: Tuboovarian abscess (TOA) is a severe complication of pelvic inflammatory disease. PID
                                   results from an ascending infection from the vagina or cervix, which results in salpingitis. If this is not recognized
                                   early and adequately treated with antibiotics, this infection can then spread to the ovaries, resulting in unilateral or
                                   bilateral TOAs. Laparoscopic access to the abdomen is performed with an umbilical port and two lateral ports. Using
                                   a suction-irrigator and laparoscopic forceps, the entire abdominal cavity is examined for purulent material. Once the
                                   abscess is localized, it is drained with the suction-irrigator. Care is taken to lyse adhesions as needed using blunt dis-
                                   section and hydrodissection. Adhesions encountered in this situation are usually filmy and can be disrupted without
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   need for sharp dissection. Meticulous dissection of the abscess and surrounding adhesions is vital for the success of
                                   this procedure. Once the ovary is freed, a small incision is made to allow for copious irrigation. The laparoscopic for-
            Surgery

                                   ceps can be used to separate any adhesions at the fimbriated end of the fallopian tubes. The procedure is completed
                                   with copious irrigation of the abdominal cavity. In cases where the TOA is chronic, laparoscopy will show that the
                                   walls of the abscess are denser, and surrounding adhesions may cause structures to be matted together. In this case,
                                   sharp dissection may be needed, but care should be taken as planes of dissection can be difficult to define.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Ectopic pregnancy; adnexal mass

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Dorsal lithotomy, legs in Allen universal stirrups, steep Trendelenburg

                                    Incision                 Intraumbilical, lateral suprapubic, midline suprapubic

                                    Special                  CO2 laser; laparoscopic instrumentation, uterine manipulator
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   Intraperitoneal hemorrhage and hemodynamic instability are potential risks. Patient should be
                                      considerations         cross-matched for 2 U PRBCs.

                                    Antibiotics              Cefoxitan 1g iv before procedure

                                    Surgical time            45 min–2 h

                                    Closing                  Fascia of 10–12-mm trocar sites closed in layers. Smaller 5-mm ports closed in a subcuticular
                                      considerations         fashion.

                                    EBL                      100 mL, severe hemorrhage, if ruptured.

                                    Postop care              The patient may be admitted overnight for observation. Quantitative β-hCG should be followed
                                                             until undetectable, to r/o the possibility of retained trophoblastic tissue.

                                    Mortality                5/1000. For any laparoscopy: 0.08–0.2/1000

===== PAGE 867 =====
Laparoscopic Myomectomy             867

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity                Overall complication rate: 2.5% hemorrhage and need for transfusion
                                              Conversion to laparotomy: 4.2/1000
                                              Air embolism: Rare
                                              Unintended puncture of a viscus: Rare
                                              Puncture of a major vessel: Rare
                                              Insufflation of incorrect site: Rare

                     Pain score               3–5

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Reproductive-age females

                     Incidence                1/100 pregnancies

                     Etiology                 Distorted tubal or uterine anatomy

                     Associated               Hx of PID; endometriosis; tubal damage; IUD; IVF
                       conditions

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Hysterectomy, p. 869.
                   Suggested Readings

                                                                                                                                                              Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     1. Bangsgaard N, Lund CO, Ottesen B, et al.: Improved fertility following conservative surgical treatment of ectopic pregnancy.
                        Bjog 2003; 110:765–70.

                                                                                                                                                                     Surgery
                     2. Farquar CM: Ectopic pregnancy. Lancet 2006; 366:583–91.
                     3. Murray H, Baakdah H, Bardell T, et al.: Diagnosis and treatment of ectopic pregnancy. Cmaj 2005; 173:905–12.
                     4. Nezhat C, Nezhat F, eds: Nezhat’s Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopy and Hysterectomy. Cambridge University
                        Press, New York: 2013.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC MYOMECTOMY
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Uterine myomata or fibroids are the most common uterine neoplasm, affecting ~20–25% of women
                   of reproductive age. Their growth is influenced by many factors, such as estrogen acting alone or synergistically
                   with growth hormone and human placental lactogen in pregnancy. The severity of symptoms depends on the num-
                   ber, size, and location of the tumors. Symptoms may include constipation, pelvic or abdominal pressure, urinary
                   frequency, and, most commonly, menorrhagia. Patients often present with profound anemia from menorrhagia or
                   menometrorrhagia, the usual indications for surgery. Other indications include rapidly changing size, ureteral com-
                   pression, hydroureter, or hydronephrosis. Size, number, and location are the primary factors that will determine
                   surgical approach to myomata.
                   For women who have completed childbearing, a vast majority are offered a hysterectomy. It is associated with a high
                   degree of patient satisfaction, but is not free from complication. Anatomic distortions from a myomatous uterus pose
                   an increased risk of injury to surrounding structures. For women wanting to maintain their fertility, a myomectomy
                   is offered. The simplest approach is a combination of laparoscopy and minilaparotomy for removal of myomas.
                   This approach limits operative time. Three major objectives of laparoscopic myomectomy are minimizing blood
                   loss, which can be severe; minimizing postop adhesion formation; and maintaining uterine-wall integrity. Preop
                   treatment with GnRH analogues to shrink fibroids has been shown to decrease the size of the myoma and reduce the

===== PAGE 868 =====
868   c h a p t e r 8.4     Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   need for transfusion. For a large myomatous uterus, in which a pure laparoscopic procedure may be tedious and diffi-
                                   cult, a laparoscopically-assisted myomectomy (LAM) is an alternative. Although myomectomy may be performed
                                   to preserve fertility, postop adhesion formation often jeopardizes this goal. This can be minimized by using a single,
                                   vertical, anterior midline uterine incision.
                                   The abdomen is entered in the usual fashion for laparoscopy (e.g., through Veress needle or direct trocar insertion,
                                   followed by insufflation and insertion of accessory trocars). To reduce blood loss in pedunculated myomas, diluted
                                   vasopressin (3–5 mL) is injected into the base of the stalk where it joins the uterine wall. IV vasopressin can cause
                                   ↑ BP, myocardial ischemia, dysrhythmias, or cardiac arrest and should be avoided. The pedicle is coagulated with
                                   the bipolar forceps and cut with CO2 laser or scissors. For subserosal or intramural myomas, diluted vasopressin is
                                   injected between the myometrium and the myoma pseudocapsule. An incision is made on the serosa overlying the
                                   myoma using the CO2 laser or monopolar needle. As the incision is made, the myometrium is retracted away from
                                   graspers to expose the tumor. Vessels are coagulated prior to cutting. After the myoma is removed, the myoma bed
                                   is copiously irrigated, and bleeding points are coagulated again. After closure, the serosa is irrigated. Uteroperitoneal
                                   fistulae may follow laparoscopic myomectomy because complete laparoscopic approximation of all layers of the
                                   myometrium is impossible. The use of electrocoagulation for hemostasis inside the uterine defect also may increase
                                   the risk of fistula formation.
                                   Removal of the specimen is frequently the most challenging aspect of the operation. The myoma can be removed
                                   either by morcellation of the specimen or by extending the suprapubic incision. Alternatively, posterior culdotomy
                                   may be performed and the myoma removed via the vagina. A retractor is placed in the vagina, and the laser is used
                                   to cut along the tented vaginal mucosa. After the myoma is removed, the incision can be closed using laparoscopic
                                   suturing. Minilaparotomy or culdotomy facilitate removal but increase postop wound complication risks, such as
                                   infection or hernia formation. After myoma removal, the abdomen and pelvis are irrigated, the patient is taken out
                                   of the Trendelenburg position, and any fluid that might have tracked into the upper abdomen is suctioned. The ports
                                   are closed in the usual fashion.
                                   Robotic assistance: Robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery is relatively new to the field of gynecologic surgery.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   The available evidence demonstrates the feasibility and safety of robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery in benign
                                   gynecologic disease, but further study is needed to define the role of robotics in this field. With the advent of
            Surgery

                                   robotic-assisted surgery, the previously described procedures can be performed with three-dimensional visualization,
                                   improved magnification, and greater operative flexibility. The only major difference is location and sometimes size of
                                   the trocars used for the robotic arms as well as possible increased operative time. Patient positioning is not different
                                   from standard laparoscopy.
                                   Usual preop diagnosis: Uterine myoma, fibroids

                                    ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                                    Position                 Dorsal lithotomy; steep Trendelenburg to move bowel out of operating field

                                    Incisions                Infraumbilical, 5 mm lateral and 5–12 mm midline suprapubic; minilaparotomy via extension of
                                                             suprapubic incision or posterior culdotomy for removal of large myomata

                                    Special                  CO2 laser; laparoscopic instrumentation, uterine manipulator
                                      instrumentation

                                    Unique                   For large myomata: pretreatment with GnRH analogues (3–6 mo). Intraop injection of dilute vaso-
                                      considerations         pressin (1 IU in 100 mL LR) into myometrium to ↓ bleeding.

                                    Antibiotics              Cefoxitin 1g iv before procedure

                                    Surgical time            1–4 h

                                    Closing                  Close fascia of all 10–12-mm ports; 5-mm ports are closed in a subcuticular fashion. Fascial
                                      considerations         closure essential in minilaparotomy. Posterior culdotomy requires laparoscopic suturing or vagi-
                                                             nal closure.

                                    EBL                      100–600 mL

                                    Postop care              Usually PACU → Home. Occasionally 24 hr hospital stay; early ambulation; clear liquids POD 0;
                                                             gradually advance diet after discharge home.

                                    Mortality                0.08–0.2/1000

===== PAGE 869 =====
Laparoscopic Hysterectomy          869

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE (cont’d)
                     Morbidity                Rates: 1.3–5.9/100
                                              Peroneal nerve damage from positioning
                                              Severe bleeding with possible need for transfusion
                                              Uteroperitoneal fistulae
                                              Infertility
                                              GI/GU injury
                                              Air embolism

                                              Puncture of a major vessel
                                              Insufflation in the wrong place
                                              Need for emergent laparotomy
                                              Uterine rupture in pregnancy: 2%
                                              Adhesion formation

                     Pain score               4–6

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range                Reproductive-age women; myomas shrink in postmenopausal women and are less symptomatic.

                     Incidence                20–25% of all women

                     Etiology                 Benign transformation and proliferation of a single smooth-muscle cell

                     Associated               Menorrhagia; anemia; ureteral obstruction; pelvic pain or pressure
                       conditions

                                                                                                                                                             Obstetric/Gynecologic
                                                                                                                                                                    Surgery
                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   See Anesthetic Considerations following Laparoscopic Hysterectomy, p. 869.
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Nezhat C, Lavie O, Hsu S, et al.: Robotic-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy compared with standard laparoscopic
                        myomectomy—a retrospective matched control study. Fertil Steril 2009; 91(2):556–9.
                     2. Nezhat C, Nezhat F, eds: Nazhat’s Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopy and Hysterectomy. Cambridge University
                        Press, New York: 2013.
                     3. Tinelli A, Malvasi A, Gustapane S, et al: Robotic assisted surgery in gynecology: current insights and future perspectives.
                        Recent Pat Biotechnol, 2011; 5(1):12–24.

                   LAPAROSCOPIC HYSTERECTOMY
                        SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                   Description: Hysterectomy is the second most common gynecologic operation, after cesarean section. The indi-
                   cations for hysterectomy ± salpingo-oophorectomy include leiomyomata (38%); malignancy (15%); ovarian tumors
                   (10%); abnormal bleeding (13%); adenomyosis (9%); pelvic pain or adhesions (5%); endometriosis (3%); and uter-
                   ine prolapse (1%). Other less common indications include parametrial disease, pelvic infection, and complications
                   of pregnancy and delivery. Selection of surgical approach to hysterectomy requires consideration of the patient’s
                   age, medical Hx, Hx of prior pelvic surgery, the presence or possibility of adhesions or endometriosis, uterine size,
                   adnexal pathology, and the presence or amount of uterine prolapse.
                   Laparoscopic hysterectomy offers the advantages of shorter recovery time, rapid return of bowel function, less
                   pain, and a lower wound complication rate. The disadvantages are higher cost and the surgical expertise required.
                   The most commonly performed procedure is the laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH), in
                   which hysterectomy is begun by laparoscopy, but four or more steps are performed vaginally. Variants include total

===== PAGE 870 =====
870   c h a p t e r 8.4     Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH), in which all steps are performed laparoscopically; subtotal laparoscopic hys-
                                   terectomy (SLH), a supracervical hysterectomy; and vaginally assisted laparoscopic hysterectomy (VALH), in
                                   which four steps are completed laparoscopically and the procedure is completed vaginally. Combinations are usually
                                   performed, depending on findings at surgery. A mechanical bowel preparation is advised. Consultation with a urolo-
                                   gist, bowel surgeon, and oncologist are sought as necessary.
                                   Access to the abdomen is obtained in the usual fashion (e.g., through a Veress needle or direct-trocar insertion, fol-
                                   lowed by insufflation and insertion of accessory trocars). Diagnostic laparoscopy is performed, adhesions lysed,
                                   and any endometriosis treated. The course of the ureters is noted through the peritoneum until they are no longer
                                   visible at the level of the cardinal ligaments. When ureters cannot be identified clearly because of severe scarring or
                                   endometriosis, they are dissected retroperitoneally, and the dissection proceeds as for a radical hysterectomy. At the
                                   cardinal ligaments, the peritoneum is opened above or below the ureter, and hydrodissection is performed to lift the
                                   peritoneum off the ureter without damaging it. Routine hysterectomy using hydrodissection to identify tissue planes
                                   and limit blood loss can be performed following identification of the ureters.
                                   If the ovaries are to be spared, the uteroovarian ligament, proximal tube, and mesosalpinx are cauterized and cut pro-
                                   gressively, and the posterior leaf of the broad ligament is opened with hydrodissection. The bladder is dissected free
                                   from the cervix and uterus. If bladder trauma is suspected, 5 mL of indigo carmine is injected iv (possible ↑ BP) that
                                   may help identify the site of perforation. Next, the uterine vessels are identified, noted to be free of ureter, desiccated,
                                   and cut. At the level of the cardinal ligaments, the ureters and descending branches of the uterine artery are close
                                   to one another and the cervix; therefore, cardinal ligament dissection and cautery must be precise to prevent bleed-
                                   ing and ureteral injury. A small uterus can be removed easily through the vagina. In benign disease, a large uterus
                                   can be morcellated and then removed segmentally through the vagina. Pneumoperitoneum will be lost during this
                                   procedure, and care must be taken to keep instruments free of bowel or other abdominal structures as this occurs.
                                   If the procedure is to be completed entirely laparoscopically, pneumoperitoneum can be maintained by placing a
                                   glove containing two 4” × 4” sponges in the vagina. The vaginal wall is cut circumferentially, and the uterus is pulled
                                   to mid vagina, but not removed, to preserve the pneumoperitoneum. Alternatively, the uterus may be morcellated and
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   removed through a 10-mm suprapubic port or placed in a laparoscopic specimen bag. The suprapubic incision also
                                   may be extended into a minilaparotomy incision for specimen removal. The vaginal cuff is closed transversely using
            Surgery

                                   laparoscopic sutures, and any coexisting cystocele or enterocele is repaired. After the uterus is removed and the vaginal
                                   cuff closed, the pelvic and abdominal cavities are reevaluated, irrigated, and cleared of blood and debris. The skin and
                                   fascia are closed in the usual fashion. Cystoscopy is performed at the end of the procedure to verify ureter function.
                                   Variant procedure: In patients with severe rectovaginal and vesical endometriosis, the retroperitoneal space is
                                   entered using hydrodissection, and the external iliac vessels, hypogastric artery, and ureters are identified. In cases
                                   where extensive dissection and resultant blood loss is anticipated, coagulation or ligation of the hypogastric artery
                                   with laparoscopic clips may be performed. Endometriosis of the rectum, rectovaginal septum, and uterosacral liga-
                                   ments is treated by vaporization, excision, or a combination of both. Sigmoidoscopy with concurrent laparoscopic
                                   visualization of the pelvis may be necessary to r/o the presence of incidental enterotomy. Cystoscopy with ure-
                                   teral stenting also may be indicated to identify anatomy. (Treatment of bladder and bowel endometriosis have been
                                   described in Laparoscopic Surgery for Endometriosis, p. 862.) After the ureter is identified along its course and entry
                                   into the bladder, the uterine vessels are retracted medially and separated from the ureter using a CO2 laser. The uterus
                                   is retracted medially and the ureter laterally as the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments are cauterized and cut with the
                                   ureter under direct visualization. After these vascular pedicles have been ligated and all endometriosis treated, the
                                   hysterectomy and specimen removal proceed as described earlier.
                                   Robotic Assistance: With the advent of robotic-assisted surgery all of the above procedures can be performed
                                   with three-dimensional visualization, improved magnification, and greater operative flexibility. With this setup, the
                                   surgeon sits at a console, and two or three assistants are at the side of the patient. The only major difference is loca-
                                   tion and size of trocars used for the robotic arms as well as possible increased operative time. Patient positioning is
                                   not different from standard laparoscopy.
                                   After or at the time of closure of the vaginal cuff, some gynecologic surgeons perform a culdoplasty to close the pos-
                                   terior cul-de-sac. This is recommended to decrease the risk of enterocele formation and the potential development of
                                   vaginal vault prolapsed. There are different types of culdoplasty. They can be done vaginally or laparoscopically. The
                                   most common vaginal culdoplasty is the McCall culdoplasty where the uterosacral-cardinal complex is plicated and
                                   attached to the peritoneal surface of the posterior cul-de-sac to elevate the posterior vaginal cuff. After the uterus is
                                   removed, the patient is placed in dorsal lithotomy position to allow for vaginal access. Before closure of the cuff, an
                                   absorbable suture is placed through the full thickness of the posterior vaginal wall from outside to in, then passed
                                   through the left uterosacral ligament pedicle, the posterior peritoneum, the right uterosacral ligament pedicle, and

===== PAGE 871 =====
Laparoscopic Hysterectomy       871

                   back through the full thickness of the posterior vaginal cuff from inside out. The two ends of the suture are then tied,
                   which brings the uterosacral ligaments together and this procedure is called Moskowitz culdoplasty. After the vaginal
                   cuff is closed, a separate absorbable suture is closed the posterior cul-de-sac. Suture is passed through one of the
                   uterosacral ligaments, through the posterior peritoneum, through the other uterosacral ligament, and then through
                    another portion of the posterior peritoneum and tied to form a purse string. Another type of laparoscopic culdo-
                    plasty is the Halban’s culdoplasty. After the vaginal cuff is closed, interrupted suture are placed vertically across
                    the posterior cul-de-sac starting with the posterior peritoneum over the rectum and taking small portions of the
                    peritoneum up to and including the vaginal cuff apex. Usually three to four interrupted sutures are used. The most
                    common complications of culdoplasty are injury to the ureter. Because of the suturing of the uterosacral ligaments,
                    which are very close to the ureters, the ureters are at risk for being obstructed by the culdoplasty stitch. Indigo car-
                    mine should be given intravenously prior to the procedure to help better identify the ureter. Cystoscopy should also
                    be performed after the culdoplasty to ensure ureteral patency. Another complication, although uncommon, is rectal
                    injury. The rectum is directly under the posterior peritoneum and can occasionally get sutured into the culdoplasty.
                    If this is suspected, then proctoscopy should be performed to evaluate the rectum.
                   Usual preop diagnosis: Leiomyomata; malignancy; ovarian tumors; abnormal bleeding; adenomyosis; pelvic pain or
                   adhesions; endometriosis; uterine prolapse; parametrial disease; pelvic infection; complications of pregnancy and delivery

                     ■■ SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE
                     Position                Dorsal lithotomy; legs in stirrups; steep Trendelenburg

                     Incisions               Ports: Intraumbilical; midline suprapubic (5 or 10 mm); lateral lower quadrant

                     Special                 CO2 laser; laparoscopic instruments, uterine manipulator
                       instrumentation

                     Unique                  Extensive ureterolysis and treatment of endometriosis may require addition of cystoscopy, ure-

                                                                                                                                                       Obstetric/Gynecologic
                       considerations        teral stent placement, and/or sigmoidoscopy.

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                     Antibiotics             Cefoxitin 1g iv before procedure

                     Surgical time           2–6 h. Operative time is increased in cases of extensive adhesiolysis or endometriosis.

                     Closing                 Close fascia of all 10–12-mm ports; 5-mm trocar sites closed in a subcuticular fashion. Mini-
                       considerations        laparotomy closure if needed.

                     EBL                     100–800 mL, depending on anatomy and difficulty of dissection

                     Postop care             PACU → Home. May need 24 h observation.

                     Mortality               0.08–0.2/1000

                     Morbidity               Overall complication rate: 2.5%
                                             Conversion to laparotomy: 4.2/1000
                                             Air embolism: Rare
                                             Peroneal nerve damage from positioning: Rare
                                             Unintended puncture of a viscus: Rare
                                             Puncture of a major vessel: Rare
                                             Insufflation of incorrect site: Rare
                                             Urinary and ureteral trauma, including fistulae: 1.6%

                     Pain score              4–9

                     ■■ PATIENT POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                     Age range               30s–90s

                     Incidence               20% of women < 40 yr; 37% of women < age 65

                     Etiology                See Associated Conditions.

                     Associated              Myomata; abnormal uterine bleeding; adenomyosis; malignancy; pelvic pain; endometriosis
                       conditions

===== PAGE 872 =====
872   c h a p t e r 8.4     Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   Suggested Readings
                                     1. Nezhat CR, et al: When will video-assisted and robotic-assisted endoscopy replace almost all open surgeries? Minim Invasive
                                        Gynecol 2012; 19:238–43.
                                     2. Nezhat C, Nezhat F, eds: Nezhat’s Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopy and Hysterectomy. Cambridge University
                                        Press, New York: 2013.

                                   Laparoscopic Surgery for Vaginal Vault
                                   Suspension
                                   SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
                                   Description: Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a more common finding in older women. There are both nonsurgical
                                   and surgical approaches to treatment. The nonsurgical options include pessaries and pelvic floor training and are
                                   often used for women who are not surgical candidates or who would rather not undergo surgery. A surgical approach
                                   to treating POP is more definitive and can be performed abdominally, vaginally, laparoscopically, or robotically.
                                   When being performed laparoscopically or robotically, the patient benefits from a shorter hospital stay, less postop
                                   pain, and faster recovery. Sacrocolpopexy is considered the surgical standard for treatment of POP. This procedure
                                   aims to provide apical support for defects in the cardinal-uterosacral ligament complex. This procedure is not with-
                                   out unique complications. They include mesh and suture erosion, dyspareunia, and alterations to bowel or bladder
                                   function.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                   The abdomen is entered in the usual fashion for laparoscopy through a Veress needle or direct trocar insertion fol-
                                   lowed by insufflations and insertion of accessory trocars. If the patient has not had a hysterectomy, a hysterectomy
            Surgery

                                   is performed as described in the previous section. The bowel is removed from the pelvis for visualization. There
                                   are two main areas of dissection, pelvic and presacral. Using hydrodissection, laparoscopic graspers, and a cutting
                                   device (CO2 laser or laparoscopic scissors) the bladder is mobilized and dissected away from the anterior surface of
                                   the vagina. In a similar fashion, the rectum is dissected and mobilized away from the posterior surface of the vagina.
                                   It is important in this dissection to identify tissue planes and avascular spaces. Vasopressin injection may be used
                                   during the dissection to control bleeding and allow for better visualization. The dissections may go as far down as the
                                   bladder neck anteriorly and the perineal body posteriorly. Attention is then turned to the presacral area. The perito-
                                   neum over the sacrum is tented up with laparoscopic graspers and incised. Oftentimes, hydrodissection in this area
                                   is beneficial for identification of the correct tissue planes. The dissection is carried down to and through the presacral
                                   adipose to the level of the anterior longitudinal ligament. Particular attention must be taken to avoid injury to the
                                   middle sacral vessels, the right ureter, and sigmoid colon. At this time the peritoneum between the presacral dissec-
                                   tion and the posterior vaginal dissection is opened. This will be closed later over mesh, making it retroperitoneal. A
                                   “Y” shaped mesh is inserted through a trocar into the abdomen. The mesh is then secured to the posterior and ante-
                                   rior side of the vagina, taking full thickness bites and using laparoscopic suturing technique. The tail of the mesh is
                                   then secured to the anterior longitudinal ligament in a similar fashion, suspending the vaginal apex. The peritoneum
                                   is then closed over the mesh to help prevent bowel adhesions. The pelvis is then irrigated and hemostasis confirmed.
                                   The ports are closed in the usual fashion. If a concurrent hysterectomy was performed, a cystoscopy is done at the
                                   end of the procedure to ensure that the ureters are patent.
                                   Variant Procedure: The vaginal posterior and anterior dissection, as well as the type of graft material used for the
                                   suspension, are the two main areas that may vary during this procedure. Both of these factors are highly dependent
                                   on the surgeon.

                                    ■■ Summary of Procedure
                                    Position                                   Dorsal lithotomy, legs in stirrups, steep Trendelenburg

                                    Incisions                                  Ports: intraumbilical, lateral lower quadrants, midline suprapubic

                                    Special instruments                        CO2 laser or other cutting instrument, bipolar Kleppinger forceps, suction irriga-
                                                                               tor, uterine manipulator

===== PAGE 873 =====
Laparoscopic Surgery for Vaginal Vault Suspension           873

                     ■■ Summary of Procedure (cont’d)
                     Unique considerations                    Depending on the amount of dissection, cystoscopy, ureteral stent placement,
                                                              and sigmoidoscopy may be needed

                     Antibiotics                              Cefoxitin 1 g iv before procedure

                     Surgical time                            2–6 h

                     Closing considerations                   Close fascia of all 10–12-mm ports, subcuticular closure for 5-mm trocar
                                                              sites

                     EBL                                      100–800 mL

                     Postop care                              PACU → home, may need 24 h observations

                     Mortality                                Rare

                     Morbidity                                Ureter injury or occlusion

                                                              Vascular injury

                                                              Viscus perforation

                                                              Insufflations of incorrect site

                                                              Adhesions

                     Pain score                               4–9

                     Patient Population Characteristics

                                                                                                                                                          Obstetric/Gynecologic
                     Age range                                30–90s

                                                                                                                                                                 Surgery
                     Incidence                                20% of women > 40 yo; 37% of women > 65 yo

                     Etiology                                 See associated conditions

                     Associated conditions                    Cystocele, rectocele, enterocele

                   Suggested Reading

                     1. Nezhat C, Nezhat F, eds: Nezhat’s Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted-Laparoscopy and Hysterectomy. Cambridge University
                        Press, New York: 2013.

                        ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
                   (Procedures covered: laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis, ectopic pregnancy, myomectomy, hysterectomy)

                        PREOPERATIVE

                    Respiratory               There can be intraop respiratory compromise from ↑ intraabdominal pressure 2° CO2
                                              insufflation; however, patients without significant respiratory disease tolerate the insuffla-
                                              tion quite well. Look for diaphragmatic hernia, advanced pulmonary disease, which → ↑
                                              risk of laparoscopic approach.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

                    Cardiovascular            Insufflation of the abdomen (typically with pressures of 14–22 mm Hg) → ↑ SVR and ↓
                                              venous return. ↑ PaCO2 → ↑ dysrhythmias. These are usually well tolerated in the other-
                                              wise healthy patient.
                                              Tests: As indicated from H&P

===== PAGE 874 =====
874   c h a p t e r 8.4   Laparoscopic Procedures for Gynecologic Surgery

                                   Gastrointestinal        Consider dehydration if patient had mechanical bowel prep. Consider NPO status for emer-
                                                           gent ectopic pregnancy patients. High BMI complicates steep Trendelenburg positioning
                                                           during laparoscopic pelvic surgery. Prior pelvic and abdominal surgery and intraabdominal
                                                           disease including endometriosis and pelvic inflammatory disease → will ↑ complicate lapa-
                                                           roscopic surgery and my force conversion to open procedure. Large The combination of ↑
                                                           intraabdominal pressure + Trendelenburg position → ↑ aspiration risk.
                                                           Test: Electrolytes

                                   Hematologic             These patients often are having surgery for abnormal uterine bleeding → consider anemia,
                                                           which may be severe.
                                                           Tests: Hgb/Hct; consider T&S/T&C, especially if patient anemic preop.

                                   Laboratory              Other tests as indicated from H&P

                                   Premedication           Consider midazolam 1–2 mg iv

                                       INTRAOPERATIVE
                                   Anesthetic technique:GETA

                                    Induction              Standard induction (see p. B-2). Rapid sequence induction (see p. B-5) usually is indicated
                                                           for patients with an ectopic pregnancy. OGT/NGT to decompress stomach prior to lapa-
                                                           roscopic trocar insertion.

                                    Maintenance            Standard maintenance (see p. B-3). Muscle relaxation helpful for initial trocar insertions
                                                           and may be helpful throughout procedure.
     Obstetric/Gynecologic

                                    Emergence              Standard emergence
            Surgery

                                    Blood and fluid        Usually minimal blood loss though     Consider preop hypovolemia if mechanical bowel
                                       requirements        may be significant during some        prep used and in setting of acute bleeding (ectopic
                                                           procedures. Discuss with surgeon      pregnancy w rupture). Establish iv access accord-
                                                           ahead of time.                        ingly. During surgery, large volumes of fluid are
                                                           IV: NS/LR @ 2–6 mL/kg/h               sometimes given intraabdominally for irrigation
                                                                                                 and hydrodissection → fluid overload; therefore,
                                                                                                 carefully account for all fluids, and titrate iv fluids
                                                                                                 to maintain euvolemia.

                                    Monitoring             Standard monitors (see p. B-1).
                                                           Foley catheter

                                    Positioning            3 and pad pressure points             Sciatic and femoral nerve injuries may occur in the
                                                           3 eyes                                lithotomy position. Check to minimize hip abduc-
                                                                                                 tion and external rotation. Carefully pad and secure
                                                                                                 knees and heels. Watch hands and fingers carefully
                                                                                                 when arms tucked at patient’s side.

                                    Complications          Abdominal access injuries             Most complications occur during abdominal access.
                                                                                                 These include injuries to major and minor vessels
                                                                                                 and may lead to catastrophic and even fatal bleed-
                                                                                                 ing. Bowel and bladder injuries may occur and may
                                                                                                 go undiagnosed until postop period.
                                                           Pneumoperitoneum effects              Effects may include subcutaneous emphysema, medi-
                                                                                                 astinal emphysema, pneumothorax, shoulder pain,
                                                                                                 CO2 retention, air embolism following venous injury,
                                                                                                 and dysrhythmias. Physiologic changes induced by
                                                                                                 pneumoperitoneum including ↑ HR, MAP, PVR, and
                                                                                                 SVR and ↓ VC, venous return, preload, and CO may
                                                                                                 be poorly tolerated in patients with advance pulmo-
                                                                                                 nary and/or cardiac disease.

===== PAGE 875 =====
Laparoscopic Surgery for Vaginal Vault Suspension            875

                     Complications           Bradydysrhythmias                        May be profound. Halt surgery, consider deflate
                       (cont’d)                                                       pneumoperitoneum, and treat with atropine (0.5 mg)
                                                                                      or glycopyrolate (0.2–0.4 mg) if persistent or severe.
                                             Abdominal wall hematoma                  See positioning.
                                             Nerve injury
                                             Hypothermia
                                             Neuropathies                             These can be long cases, with the patient in lithot-
                                                                                      omy position. Make sure the pressure points are
                                                                                      padded well and, if the arms are out, relieve stress
                                                                                      on the brachial plexus.
                                             Fluid overload                           3 fluid volume entering and exiting the abdomen.
                                                                                      Fluid absorption → fluid overload → CHF, edema.

                        POSTOPERATIVE

                    Complications            PONV                                     ↑↑ Risk for PONV. See p. B-6.
                                             VTE                                      See p. B-8.
                                             Hypothermia

                    Pain                     Consider ketorolac 15–30 mg and          Patients may complain of shoulder pain due to dia-
                      management             LA into surgical wounds                  phragmatic irritation.

                                                                                                                                                       Obstetric/Gynecologic
                   Suggested Readings
                     1. Gerges FJ, Kanazi GE, Jabbour-Kohoury SI: Anesthesia for laparoscopy–a review. J Clin Anesth 2006; 18(1): 67–78.

                                                                                                                                                              Surgery
                     2. Goulson DT: Anesthesia for outpatient gynecologic surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007; 20(3):195–200.
                     3. Hayden, P, Cowman, S: Anaesthesia for laparoscopic surgery. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care & Pain
                        2011; 11(5):177–180.

